

--- PAGE 0 ---


--- PAGE 1 ---
OF
J E } ‘i respecttully riped by..
LO
oy

Op )

This Book is Dedicated to the Free, Creative
Martial Artist
Take what is useful and develop from there.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Grateful acknowledgement ia made to the copyright owners for permission Wo teprint of adapt from the
fouowing Bo 1040, The Ronald Pres. DD. 33-34, 47, 72,97-00, 106, 128, 140-150,
teers, 188: "Phe Ronald Press, pp: 139-140;

pp. i32-135, 137-139, 168, 170-171,

91975 Linds Lee
All rights reserved

Printed in the
Library of Congress Cat

ited States of America
Number. 75.24803

WARNING

Pha oot pn ny aa mean of reign of i here ft mara it. Neer Ohare
Paes nr heparan ey emnemice. were ana heen etd eed
(So beet wba tes ate coon trea ow sy bs apd go pp a
eh of eet nd nc en Onars Ponce baer wegen ra
(Diay ie nay rs scorn! hr yx comma apy gang wher tte whem ay see 3
fatarbck Spt ut fem raga ened sta my mt Wen ty pre wr
‘Newof eof necrcmmane oe snr taper esral ator sai Nesey Onrs Petacons are nat
ile ty genera never tego he egw npg of a tm Soae evina fh

OHARA PUBLICATIONS, INCORPORATED. 24715 Avenue Rockefeller, P.O. Box 918, Santa Clarita, California 91380-9018


--- PAGE 2 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

(Gurney)

Into a soul absolutely free
From thoughts and emotion,
Even the tiger finds no room
To insert its fierce claws.

One and the same breeze passes
Over the pines on the mountain
And the oak trees in the valley;
And why do they give different notes?

No thinking, no reflecting,
Perfect emptiness;

Yet therein something moves,
Following its own course.

‘The eye sees it,
But no hands can take hold of it —
‘The moon in the stream.

Clouds and mists,
‘They are midair transformations;
Above them eternally shine the sun and the moon.

Victory is for the one,

Even before the combat,

Who has no thought of himself,

Abiding in the no-mind-ness of Great Origin.


--- PAGE 3 ---
‘THE MARTIAL ARTS INCLUDING BOXING. %
Bhi

Tascuateinwotenmumas | Tot t
ing, hard work and a total comprehension of FRCEE 4 DAS DOO
skills. Power training and the use of force are SIDA HH TY Be.
easy, but total comprehension of all of the LARWLCL EP ES HAL
skills of the martial arts is very difficult to LGA RRA iy NAH
achieve. To understand you must study all of 6
taturl movement inal tving things Nataly, | Se fi) A
gee nea itd awe Se AGE wes iC LE

‘ou can study the timing and the weaknesses. oie
Just knowing these two elements will give you %g ae ys HM MAE
‘the capacity to knock him down rather easily.

a é
‘THE HEART OF THE MARTIAL ARTS: x ace

ISIN UNDERSTANDING TECHNIQUES, FMAM MM LEFL eee Bit

‘To understand techniques you must learn KEM TLE ME EA HCL
that they contain a lot of condensed move- ty AME, ELE to $F BOE
ment, This may look quite awkward. When you RIABERED A&B.
start to learn it you will find that it is awkward
to you. That is because a good technique in- Ke dk we
‘cludes quick changes, great variety and speed. It iz wé
may be a system of reversals much like a con- TRAE A ALE DHE HT)
‘sept of God and the Devil. In the speed of ERED MET ea nM,
vents, which one is really in charge? Do they HAF SA EF
‘change places with lightning speed? The Chinese COERELILRTILATY
believe $0, To put the heart of the martial arts 4 , ShM IEA
a eee |. $n8 RAS TIER
‘means total comprehension and the use of a free Shik,

style, When you have that you will know that
there are no limits.

PRECAUTIONS ON PHYSICAL TECHNIQUES.

Some martial arts are very popular, real crowd pleasers, because they look good, have smooth
techniques. But beware, They are like « wine that has been watered. A diluted wine is not a real wine,
not a good wine, hardly the genuine article.

‘Some martial arts don't Look $0 good, but you know that they have a kick, a tang, a genuine taste,
‘They ate like olives. The taste may be strong and bitter-sweet. The flavor lasts, You cultivate a taste
for them. No one ever developed a taste for diluted wine.

ACQUIRED TALENT AND NATURAL TALENT

‘Some people are born with good physiques, a sense of speed and a lol of stamina. That's fine. But
in the martial arts everything you learn is an acquired skill.

Absorbing 4 martial artis like the experience of Buddhism. The feeling for it comes from the
heart. You have the dedication to get what you know you need. When it becomes part of you, you
know you have it. You succeed at it. You may never fully understand all of it, but you keep at it.
‘And as you progress you know the true nature of the simple way. You may join a temple or a kwon,
You observe nature's simple way. You experience a life you never had before,

‘Translation: David Koong Pak Sen


--- PAGE 4 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

A
be
ff
fi

INTRODUCTION

My husband Bruce always considered himself a martial artist first and an actor
second. At the age of 13, Bruce started lessons in the wing chun style of gung-fu for
the purpose of self-defense. Over the next 19 years, he transformed his knowledge into
ascience, an art, a philosophy and a way of life. He trained his body through exercise
and practice; he trained his mind through reading and reflecting and he recorded his
thoughts and ideas constantly over the 19 years. The pages of this book represent the
pride of a life’s work.

In his lifelong quest for self-knowledge and personal expression, Bruce was con-
stantly studying, analyzing and modifying all available relative information; his
principle source was his personal library which consisted of over 2,000 books dealing
with all forms of physical conditioning, martial arts, fighting techniques, defenses and
related subjects.

In 1970, Bruce sustained a rather severe injury to his back. His doctots ordered him
to discontinue the practice of martial arts and to remain in bed to allow his back to
heal. This was probably the most trying and dispiriting time in Bruce’s life. He stayed
in bed, virtually flat on his back for six months, but he couldn’t keep his mind from
working — the result of which is this book. The bulk of these writings was done at that
time, but many scattered notes were recorded at earlier and later times. Bruce's
personal study notes reveal that he was particularly impressed by the writings
of Edwin L. Haislet, Julio Martinez Castello, Hugo and James Castello and Roget
Crosnier. Many of Bruce's own theories are directly related to those expressed by these
writers.

Bruce had decided to finish the book in 1971 but his film work kept him from com-
pleting it. He also vacillated about the advisability of publishing his work because he
felt it might be used for wrong purposes. He did not intend it to be a “how-to” book
or a “learn kung-fu in 10 easy lessons” book. He intended it as a record of one man’s
way of thinking and as a guide, not a set of instructions. If you can read it in this light,
there is much to be aware of on these pages. And, you probably will have many ques-
tions, the answers to which you must seek within yourself, When you have finished this
book, you will know Bruce Lee better, but hopefully you will also know yourself
better.

Now, open your mind and read, understand, and experience, and when you've
reached that point, discard this book. The pages are best used for cleaning up a mess —
as you will see.

Linda Lee

In the hands of a singular man, simple things carefully placed ring with an unde-
niable harmony, Bruce's orchestration of martial arts had that quality, most apparent
in his combat motion. Immobilized for several months with an injured back, he picked
up a pen. There, too, he wrote as he spoke, as he moved — with directness and with
honesty.

Like listening to a musical composition, understanding the elements within it adds a
specialness to the sound. For this reason, Linda Lee and I are liberalizing the introduc-
tion of Bruce’s book to explain how it came about.

‘The Tao of Jeet Kune Do actually began before Bruce was born. The classical wing
chun style that started him on his way was developed 400 years before his time. The
2,000 or 80 books he owned and the countless books he read, described the individual
“discoveries” of thousands of men before him. There's nothing new within this book;
there are no secrets. “It's nothing special,” Bruce used to say. And so it wasn't.

Bruce's special key was knowing himself and his own capabilities to correctly


--- PAGE 5 ---
choose things that worked for him and to convey those things in movement and in
language. He found in the philosophies of Confucius, Spinoza, Krishnamurti and
others, an organization for his concepts and, with that organization, he began the book
of his tao,

The book when he died was only partially completed. Though it spanned seven vol-
umes, it filled only one. Between major blocks of copy were unnumbered pages of
unused paper, each headed by simple titles. Sometimes he wrote introspectively, asking
questions of himself. More often he wrote to his invisible student, the reader. When hi
wrote quickly, he sacrificed his practiced grammar and when he took his time, he was
eloquent.

Some of the material within the volumes was written in a single setting and had the
natural progression of a well-outlined conversation. Other areas were sudden inspira-
tions and incomplete ideas that were quickly scribbled as they entered Bruce’s head.
‘These were scattered throughout the work. In addition to the seven hardbound vol-
umes, Bruce wrote notes throughout the development of his Jeet Kune Do and left
them in stacks and drawers among his belongings. Some were outdated and others were
‘more recent and still valuable to his book.

With the help of his wife, Linda, I collected and scanned and thoroughly indexed all
the material. Then, I tried to draw the scattered ideas together into cohesive blocks.
Most of the copy was left: unchanged and the drawings and sketches are his own.

‘The book's organization, however, could not have been justly done were it not for
the patient attention of Danny Inosanto, his assistant instructors and class of senior
students, It was they who took my eight years of martial arts training, threw it out on
the floor and turned the theories into action with their knowledge. They have my grati-
tude both as the editor of this book and, separately, as a martial artist.

It should be mentioned that the Tao of Jeet Kune Do is not complete. Bruce's art
was changing every day. Within the Five Ways of Attack, for instance, he originally
began with a category called hand immobilization. Later, he found that too limitin,
since immobilizations could be applied to the legs and arms and head as well. It was a
simple observation that showed the limits of attaching labels to any concept.

‘The Tao of Jeet Kune Do has no real ending. It serves, instead, as a beginning. It has
no style; it has no level, though it’s most easily read by those who understand their
‘weapons. To probably every statement within the book, there is an exception — no
book could give a total picture of the combat arts. This is simply a work that describes
the direction of Bruce’s studies. The investigations are left undone; the questions, some
elementary and some complex, are left unanswered to make the student question for
himself. Likewise, the drawings are often unexplained and may offer only vague im-
pressions. But if they spark a question, if they raise an idea, they serve a purpose.

Hopefully, this book will be used as a source of ideas for all martial artists, ideas
that should then develop further. Inevitably and regrettably, the book may also cause a
rash of “Jeet Kune Do” schools, headed by people who know the reputation of the
name and very little about the movement. Beware of such schools! If their instructors
missed the last, most important line, chances are they failed to understand the book at
all.

Even the organization of the book means nothing. There are no real lines between
speed and power, or between precision and kicking, or hand strikes and range; each
element of combat movement affects those around it. The divisions I’ve made are only
for convenient reading — don’t take them too seriously. Use a pencil as you read and
cross reference the related areas you find. Jeet Kune Do, you see, has no definite lines
or boundaries — only those you make yourself.

Gilbert L. Johnson


--- PAGE 6 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

CONTENTS

1 Seton seth
Art of the Soul

A Jeet Kune Do... .....
a aes Organized Despair.
‘The Facts of Jeet Kune Do

‘The Formless Form .
PRELIMINARIES .
‘Training .....
Warming Up . . .
On-Guard Position
Progressive Weapons on
Bight Basic Defense Positions . . .
Some Target Areas
QUALITIES .
Coordination
Precision
Power ee
Endurance -
Balance... .. .
Body Feel... .
Good Form
Vision Awareness
Speed . .
Timing .
Attitude
TOORs™ ee)
‘Some Weapons from JKD_
tribe Sor
Striking
Grappling .. .
Studies on Judo and Ju-Jitsu
PREPARATIONS .... .
Feints .
Manipulations . .
MOBILITY

Preparation of Attack
Simple Attack .
Compound Attack
Counterattack .

Five Ways of Attack |.
CIRCLE WITH NO CIRCUMFERENCE...
IT'S JUSTANAME 2.2.00... eee e



--- PAGE 7 ---
ON ZEN

To obtain eitightenment in martial art means the extinction of everything which ob-
scures the “true knowledge,” the “real life.” At the same time, it implies boundless
expansion and, indeed, emphasis should fall not on the cultivation of the particular de-
partment which merges into the totality, but rather on the totality that enters and
unites that particular department.

‘The way to transcend karma lies in the proper use of the mind and the will, The one-
ness of all life is a truth that can be fully realized only when false notions of a separate
self, whose destiny can be considered apart from the whole, are forever annihilated.

Voidness is that which stands right in the middle between this and that, The void is
all-inclusive, having no opposite — there is nothing which it excludes or opposes. It is
living void, because all forms come out of it and whoever realizes the void is filled with
life and power and the love of all beings.

‘The consciousness
of self is the great-
est hindrance to
‘Tum into a doll made of wood: it has no ego, it thinks nothing, it is not grasping or the proper exe-
sticky. Let the body and limbs work themselves out in accordance with the discipline _cution of all
they have undergone. physical action.

Ifnothing within you stays rigid, outward things will disclose themselves. Moving, be
like water, Still, be like a mirror. Respond like an echo.

Nothingness cannot be defined; the softest thing cannot be snapped.

T’m moving and not moving at all. I’m like the moon undemeath the waves that ever
go on rolling and rocking. It is not, “I am doing this,” but rather, an inner realization
that “this is happening through me,” or “it is doing this for me.” The consciousness
of self is the greatest hindrance to the proper execution of all physical action.

‘The localization of the mind means its freezing. When it ceases to flow freely as it is
needed, it is no more the mind in its suchness.


--- PAGE 8 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

BU
es
Hf
f

To see a thing
uncolored by
one’s own person-
al preferences and
desires is to see it
in its own pristine
simplicity.

‘The “Immovable” is the concentration of energy at a given focus, as at the axis of @
wheel, instead of dispersal in scattered activities.

‘The point is the doing of them rather than the accomplishments. There is no actor but
the action; there is no experiencer but the experience,

‘To see. thing uncolored by one’s own personal preferences and desires is to see it in
its own pristine simplicity.

Art reaches its greatest peak when devoid of self-consciousness. Freedom discovers
man the moment he loses concern over what impression he is making or about to make.

The perfect way is only difficult for those who pick and choose. Do not like, do not

dislike; all will then be clear. Make a hairbreadth difference and heaven and earth are

set apart; if you want the truth to stand clear before you, never be for or against. The
struggle between “for” and “against” is the mind's worst disease.

Wisdom does not consist of trying to wrest the good from the evil but in learning to
“ride” them as a cork adapts itself to the crests and troughs of the waves.

Let yourself go with the disease, be with it, keep company with it — this is the way to
be rid of it.

An assertion is Zen only when it is itself an act and does not refer to anything that is,
asserted in it.

In Buddhism, there is no place for using effort. Just be ordinary and nothing special.
Eat your food, move your bowels, pass water and when you're tired go and lie down.
‘The ignorant will laugh at me, but the wise will understand.

Establish nothing in regard to oneself. Pass quickly like the non-existent and be quiet
as purity. Those who gain lose. Do not precede others, always follow them,


--- PAGE 9 ---
Do not run away; let go. Do not seek, for it will come when least expected.

Give up thinking as though not giving it up. Observe techniques as though not ob-
serving.

‘There is no fixed teaching. All I can provide is an appropriate medicine for a particular
ailment.

Buddhism's Eight-Fold Path

‘The eight requirements to eliminate suffering by correcting false values and giving true
knowledge of life’s meaning have been summed up as follows:

1. Right views (understanding): You must see clearly what is wrong.
2. Right purpose (aspiration): Decide to be cured.
3. Right speech: Speak so as to aim at being cured.
4, Right conduct: You must act. ‘There is no fixed
5. Right vocation: Your livelihood must not conflict with your therapy. teaching. All T can
6. Right effort: ‘The therapy must go forward at the “staying speed,” the peste’ Sot
critical velocity that can be sustained. ae Sarasa
7. Right awareness (mind control): You must feel it and think about it ailment.
incessantly.
8. Right concentration (meditation): Learn how to contemplate with the
deep mind.
ART OF THE SOUL

The aim of art is to project an inner vision into the world, to state in aesthetic creation
the deepest psychic and personal experiences of a human being. It is to enable those
experiences to be intelligible and generally recognized within the total framework of
an ideal world.

Art reveals itself in psychic understanding of the inner essence of things and gives form
to the relation of man with nothing, with the nature of the absolute.

Art is an expression of life and transcends both time and space. We must employ our


--- PAGE 10 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

x
ib
Hf
ft

“Astless art”
is the artistic

meaning is “art
of the soul.”

10

‘own souls through art to give a new form and a new meaning to nature or the world

An artist’s expression is his soul made apparent, his schooling, as well as his “coo!”
being exhibited. Behind every motion, the music of his soul is made visible. Other-
wise, his motion is empty and empty motion is like an empty word — no meaning.

Eliminate “not clear” thinking and function from your root.

Art is never decoration, embellishment; instead, it is work of enlightenment. Art, in
other words, is a lechnique for acquiring liberty.

Art calls for complete mastery of techniques, developed by reflection within the soul.

“Artless art” is the artistic process within the artist; its meaning is “art of the soul.””
lll the various moves of all the tools means a step on the way to the absolute aesthetic
world of the soul.

Creation in art is the psychic unfolding of the personality, which is rooted in the noth-
ing. Its effect is a deepening of the personal dimension of the soul.

‘The artless art is the art of the soul at peace, like moonlight mirrored in a deep lake.
‘The ultimate aim of the artist is to use bis daily activity to become a past master of
life, and so lay hold of the art of living. Masters in all branches of art must first be
masters of living, for the soul creates everything.

All vague notions must fall before a pupil can call himself a master.

Artis the way to the absolute and to the essence of human life. The aim of art is not
the one-sided promotion of spirit, soul and senses, but the opening of all human capaci-
ties — thought, feeling, will — to the life rhythm of the world of nature. So will the
voiecless voice be heard and the self be brought into harmony with it.


--- PAGE 11 ---
Artistic skill, therefore, does not mean artistic perfection. It remains rather a con-
tinuing medium or reflection of some step in psychic development, the perfection of
which is not to be found in shape and form, but must radiate from the human soul.

‘The artistic activity does not lie in art itself as such. It penetrates into a deeper world
in which all art forms (of things inwardly experienced) flow together, and in which the
harmony of soul and cosmos in the nothing has its outcome in reality.

It is the artistic process, therefore, that is reality and reality is truth.

‘The Path To Truth
1. SEEKING AFTER TRUTH
2. AWARENESS OF TRUTH (and its existence)

3. PERCEPTION OF TRUTH (its substance and direction — like the perception It is indeed diff-
cult to see the

of movement) atastieetaltay

4, UNDERSTANDING OF TRUTH (A first-rate philosopher practices it to SBugide are
understand it — TAO. Not to be fragmented, eV cotibies =
but to see the totality — Krishnamurti) and it is easy to

5, EXPERIENCING OF TRUTH eae ie

, itis

6. MASTERING OF TRUTH hen

7. FORGETTING TRUTH —.

8. FORGETTING THE CARRIER OF TRUTH ‘attitude.

9. RETURN TO THE PRIMAL SOURCE

WHERE TRUTH HAS ITS ROOTS
10. REPOSE IN THE NOTHING

JEET KUNE DO

For security, the unlimited living is turned into something dead, a chosen pattern that
limits. To understand Jeet Kune Do, one ought to throw away all ideals, patterns,
styles; in fact, he should throw away even the concepts of what is or isn’t ideal in Jeet
Kune Do. Can you look at a situation without naming it? Naming it, making it a
word, causes fear.

It is indeed difficult to see the situation simply — our minds are very complex — and it
is easy to teach one to be skillful, but it is difficult to teach him his own attitude.

u


--- PAGE 12 ---
ewe cass ae ae

#U
he
fi

Jeet Kune Do
avoids the super-
ficial, penetrates

the complex, goes
to the heart of the
problem and pin-
points the key
factors.

12

Jeet Kune Do favors formlessness so that it can assume all forms and since Jeet Kune
Dp has no style, it can fit in with all styles. As a result, Jeet Kune Do utilizes all ways
and is bound by none and, likewise, uses any techniques or means which serve its end.

Approach Jeet Kune Do with the idea of mastering the will. Forget about winning and
losing; forget about pride and pain. Let your opponent graze your skin and you smash
into his flesh; let him smash into your flesh and you fracture his bones; let him fracture
your bones and you take his life! Do not be concerned with your escaping safely —
lay your life before him!

‘The great mistake is to anticipate the outcome of the engagement; you ought not to
be thinking of whether it ends in victory or in defeat. Let nature take its course, and
your tools will strike at the right moment.

Jeet Kune Do teaches us not to look backward once the course is decided upon. It
treats life and death indifferently.

Jeet Kune Do avoids the superficial, penetrates the complex, goes to the heart of the
problem and pinpoints the key factors.

Jeet Kune Do does not beat around the bush. It does not take winding detours. It
follows a straight line to the objective. Simplicity is the shortest distance between two

points.

‘The art of Jeet Kune Do is simply to simplify. It is being oneself; it is reality in its
“‘isness.” Thus, isness is the meaning — having freedom in its primary sense, not
limited by attachments, confinements, partialization, complexities.

Jeet Kune Do is the enlightenment. It is a way of life, a movement toward will power
and control, though it ought to be enlightened by intuition.

While being trained, the student is to be active and dynamic in every way. But in
actual combat, his mind must be calm and not at all disturbed. He must feel as if
nothing critical is happening. When he advances, his steps should be light and secure,
his eyes not fixed and glaring insanely at the enemy. His behavior should not be in any


--- PAGE 13 ---
way different from his everyday behavior, no change taking place in his expression,
nothing betraying the fact that he is engaged in mortal combat.

The tools, your natural weapons, have a double purpose:

1. To destroy the opponent in front of you — annihilation of things that
stand in the way of peace, justice and humanity,

2. To destroy your own impulses caused by the instincts of self-preservation.
‘To destroy anything bothering your mind. Not to hurt anyone, but to
‘overcome your own greed, anger and folly. Jeet Kune Do is directed
toward oneself.

Punches and kicks are tools to kill the ego. ‘The tools represent the force of intuitive
or instinctive directness which, unlike the intellect or the complicated ego, does not
divide itself, blocking its own freedom. The tools move onward without looking back
or to the side.

Because of the pure-heartedness and empty-mindedness inherent in man, his tools
partake of these qualities and play their role with the utmost degree of freedom. The
tools stand as symbols of the invisible spirit, keeping the mind, body and limbs in full
activity.

Absence of stereotyped technique as the substance means to be total and fre. All
lines and movements are the function.

‘Non-attachment as the foundation is man’s original nature. In its ordinary process,
thought moves forward without halting; past, present and future thoughts continue as
an unbroken stream.

Absence of thought as the doctrine means not to be carried away by thought in the
process of thought, not to be defiled by external objects, to be in thought yet devoid
of thought.

‘True thusness is the substance of thought and thought is the function of true thusness,

‘To think of thusness, to define it in thought is to defile it.

‘The art of
Jeet Kune Do
is simply to
simplify.

13


--- PAGE 14 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

4

Empty your cup
so that it may be
filled; become de-

void to gain
totality.

4

Bring the mind into sharp focus and make it alert so that it can immediately intuit
truth, which is everywhere. The mind must be emancipated from old habits, preju-
dices, restrictive thought processes and even ordinary thought itself.

Scratch away all the dirt your being has accumulated and reveal reality in its isness, or
in its suchness, or in its nakedness, which corresponds to the Buddhist concept of
emptiness.

Empty your cup so that it may be filled; become devoid to gain totality.

ORGANIZED DESPAIR.

In the long history of martial arts, the instinct to follow and imitate seems to be in-
herent in most martial artists, instructors and students alike. This is partly due to
human tendency and partly because of the steep traditions behind multiple patterns of
styles. Consequently, to find a refreshing, original, master teacher is a rarity. The need
for a “pointer of the way” echoes.

Each man belongs to a style which claims to possess truth to the exclusion of all other
styles. These styles become institutes with their explanations of the “Way,” dissecting
and isolating the harmony of firmness and gentleness, establishing rhythmic forms as
the particular state of their techniques.

Instead of facing combat in its suchness, then, most systems of martial art accumulate
“fancy mess” that distorts and cramps their practitioners and distracts them from the
actual reality of combat, which is simple and direct. Instead of going immediately to
the heart of things, flowery forms (organized despair) and artificial techniques are
ritualistically practiced to simulate actual combat. Thus, instead of “being” in combat
these practitioners are “doing” something “about” combat,

‘Worse still, super mental power and spiritual this and spiritual that are desperately in-
corporated until these practitioners drift further and further into mystery and abstrac-
tion, All such things are futile attempts to arrest and fix the ever-changing movements
in combat and to dissect and analyze them like a corpse.

When you get down to it, real combat is not fixed and is very much “alive.” The fancy


--- PAGE 15 ---
mess (a form of paralysis) solidifies and conditions what was once fluid, and when you
look at it realistically, it is nothing but a blind devotion to the systematic usclessness
of practicing routines or stunts that lead nowhere.

When real feeling occurs, such as anger or fear, can the stylist express himself with the
classical method, or is he merely listening to his own screams and yells? Is he a living,
expressive human being or merely a patternized mechanical robol? Ts he an entity,
capable of flowing with external circumstances, or is he resisting with his set of chosen
patterns? Is his chosen pattern forming a screen between him and the opponent and
preventing a “total” and “fresh” relationship?

Stylists, instead of looking directly into the fact, cling Lo forms (theories) and go on
entangling themselves further and further, finally putting themselves into an inextrica-
ble snare.

They do not see it in its suchness because their indoctrination is crooked and twisted.
Discipline must conform Lo the nature of things in their suchness.
When there is
= freedom from
mechanical con-
ditioning, there

Maturity does not mean to become a captive of conceptualization. Itis the realization {COTE A

of what lies in our innermost selves.

When there is freedom from mechanical conditioning, there is simplicity. Life is a re-
lationship Lo the whole.

‘The man who is clear and simple does not choose. What is, is. Action based on an idea
is obviously the action of choice and such action is not liberating. On the contrary, it
creates further resistance, further conflict. Assume pliable awareness.

Relationship is understanding. It is a process of sel(-revelation. Relationship is the
mireor in which you discover yourself ~ to be is to be related

Set patterns, incapable of adaptability, of pliability, only offer a better cage. ‘Truth is
outside of all patterns

ity


--- PAGE 16 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

alee al

‘The classical man
is just a bundle of
routine, ideas and

tradition.

16

Forms are vain repetitions which offer an orderly and beautiful escape from self-
knowledge with an alive opponent.

Accumulation is self-enclosing resistance and flowery techniques strengthen the
resistance.

The classical man is just a bundle of routine, ideas and tradition, When he acts, he is
translating every living moment in terms of the old.

Knowledge is fixed in time, whereas, knowing is continual. Knowledge comes from a
source, from an accumulation, from a conclusion, while knowing is a movement,

‘The additive process is merely a cultivation of memory which becomes mechanical.
Learning is never cumulative; it is a movement of knowing which has no beginning
and no end.

In martial arts cultivation, there must be a sense of freedom. A conditioned mind is
never a free mind. Conditioning limits a person within the framework of a particular
system.

To express yourself in freedom, you must die to everything of yesterday. From the
“old”, you derive security; from the “new”, you gain the flow.

To realize freedom, the mind has to learn to look at life, which is a vast movement
without the bondage of time, for freedom lies beyond the field of consciousness.
Watch, but don’t stop and interpret, “I am free” ~ then you're living in a memory of
something that has gone. To understand and live now, everything of yesterday must
die.

Freedom from knowing is death; then, you are living. Die inwardly of “pro” and
“con.” There is no such thing as doing right or wrong when there is freedom.

When one is not expressing himself, he is not free. Thus, he begins to struggle and the


--- PAGE 17 ---
struggle breeds methodical routine. Soon, he is doing his methodical routine
sponse rather than responding to what is.

‘The fighter is to always be single-minded with one object in view — to fight, looking
neither backward nor sideways. He must get rid of obstructions to his forward move-
ment, emotionally, physically or intellectually.

‘One can function freely and totally if he is “‘beyond system.” The man who is really
serious, with the urge to find out what truth is, has no style at all. He lives only in
what is.

If you want to understand the truth in martial arts, to see any opponent clearly, you
must throw away the notion of styles or schools, prejudices, likes and dislikes, and so
forth. ‘Then, your mind will cease all conflict and come to rest. In this silence, you
will see totally and freshly.

If you follow the
classical pattern,

If any style teaches you a method of fighting, then you might be able to fight accord- you are under-

ing to the limit of that method, but that is not actually fighting. standing the rou-
tine, the tradition,

— the shadow — you

are not under-

If you meet the unconventional attack, such as one delivered with broken rhythm, standing yourself.

with your chosen patterns of rhythmical classical blocks, your defense and counter-

attack will always be lacking pliability and aliveness.

It you follow the classical pattem, you are understanding the routine, the tradition,
the shadow — you are not understanding yourself.

How can one respond to the totality with partial, fragmentary pattern?

Mere repetition of rhythmic, calculated movements robs combat movement of its
“aliveness” and “‘isness” — its reality.

Accumulation of forms, just one more modification of conditioning, becomes an
anchor that holds and ties down; it leads only one way — down. -

”


--- PAGE 18 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

a
A
ff
fi

‘Truth has no
path. ‘Truth is
living and, there-
fore, changinj

18

Form is the cultivation of resistance; it is the exclusive drilling of a pattern of choice
moves, Instead of creating resistance, enter straight into the movement as it arises; do
not condemn or condone — choiceless awareness leads to reconciliation with the
opponent in a total understanding of what is.

Once conditioned in a partialized method, once isolated in an enclosing pattern, the
practitioner faces his opponent through a screen of resistance — he is ‘performing’
stylized blocks and listening to his own screaming and not seeing what the opponent
is really doing.

We are those kata, we are those classical blocks and thrusts, so heavily conditioned
are we by them.

To fit in with an opponent one needs direct perception. There is no direct perception
where there is a resistance, a “this is the only way” attitude.

Having totality means being capable of following “what is,” because “what is” is con-
stantly moving and constantly changing. If one is anchored to a particular view, one
will not be able to follow the swift movement of “what is.”

Whatever one’s opinion of hooking and swinging as part of one’s style, there cannot be
the least argument to acquiring perfect defenses against it. Indeed, nearly all natural
fighters use it. As for the martial artist, it adds versatility to his attack. He must be
able to hit from wherever his hand is.

But in classical styles, system becomes more important than the man! The classical
man functions with the pattern of a style!

How can there be methods and systems to arrive at something that is living? To that
which is static, fixed, dead, there can be a way, a definite path, but not to that which
is living. Do not reduce reality to a static thing and then invent methods to reach it.

‘Truth is relationship with the opponent; constantly moving, living, never static.

‘Truth has no path, Truth is living and, therefore, changing. It has no resting place, no


--- PAGE 19 ---
form, no organized institution, no philosophy. When you see that, you will under-
stand that this living thing is also what you are. You cannot express and be alive
through static, put-together form, through stylized movement.

Classical forms dull your creativity, condition and freeze your sense of freedom. You
no longer “be,” but merely “do,” without sensitivity.

Just as yellow leaves may be gold coins to stop the crying children, thus, the so-called
secret moves and contorted postures appease the unknowledgeable martial artists.

‘This does not mean to do nothing at all, but only to have no deliberate mind in what-
ever one does. Do not have a mind that selects or rejects. To be without deliberate
mind is to hang no thoughts.

Acceptance, denial and conviction prevent understanding. Let your mind move to-

gether with another's in understanding with sensitivity. Then, there is a possibility of eT ie
real communication, To understand one another, there must be a state of choiceless without demand,
awareness where there is no sense of comparison or condemnation, no waiting for a without anxiety;
further development of discussion in order to agree or disagree. Above all, don’t start _in that state of
from a conclusion, mind, there is
perception,

Understand the freedom from the conformity of styles. Free yourself by observing
closely what you normally practice. Do not condemn or approve; merely observe.

When you are uninfluenced, when you die to the conditioning of classical responses,
then you will know awareness and see things totally fresh, totally new.

Awareness is without choice, without demand, without anxiety; in that state of mind,
there is perception. Perception alone will resolve all our problems.

Understanding requires not just a moment of perception, but a continuous awareness,
a continuous state of inquiry without conclusion.

To understand combat, one must approach it in a very simple and direct manner.



--- PAGE 20 ---
f TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

A
he
4
fi

To know oneself
is to study oneself
in action with
another person.

20

Understanding comes about through feeling, from moment to moment in the mirror of
relatiqnship.

Understanding oneself happens through a process of relationships and not through
isolation.

‘To know oneself is to study oneself in action with another person.

‘To understand the actual requires awareness, an alert and totally free mind.

Effort within the mind further limits the mind, because effort implies struggle towards
a goal and when you have a goal, a purpose, an end in view, you have placed a limit on
the mind.

This evening I see something totally new and that newness is experienced by the mind,
but tomorrow that experience becomes mechanical if I try to repeat the sensation, the
pleasure of it, The description is never real. What is real is seeing the truth instantane-
ously, because truth has no tomorrow.

We shall find the truth when we examine the problem. The problem is never apart
from the answer. The problem is the answer — understanding the problem dissolves
the problem.

Observe what is with undivided awareness,

True thusness is without defiling thought; it cannot be known through conception and
thought.

‘Thinking is not freedom — all thought is partial; it can never be total. Thought is the
response of memory and memory is always partial, because memory is the result of
experience, So, thought is the reaction of a mind conditioned by experience.



--- PAGE 21 ---
Know the emptiness and tranquility of your mind. Be empty; have no style or form
for the opponent to work on.

‘The mind is originally without activity; the way is always without thought.

Insight is realizing that one’s original nature is not created.

There will be calmness, tranquility, when one is free from external objects and is not
perturbed. Being tranquil means not having any illusions or delusions of thusness.

‘There is no thought, only thusness — what is. Thusness does not move, but its motion
and function are inexhaustible.

To meditate means to realize the imperturbability of one’s original nature. Surely, ‘Awareness has
meditation can never be a process of concentration, because the highest form of no frontier; it is 2
thinking is negation. Negation is a state in which there is neither the positive, nor its giving of your
reaction as the negative. It isa state of complete emptiness. mrok being

without exclusion,

Concentration is a form of exclusion and where there is exclusion, there is a thinker
who excludes. It is the thinker, the excluder, the one who concentrates, who creates
contradiction because he forms a center from which there is distraction.

‘There is a state of action without the actor, a state of experiencing without the ex-
periencer or the experience. It is a state bound and weighted down by the classical
mess.

Classical concentration that focuses on one thing and excludes all others, and aware-
ness, which is total and excludes nothing, are states of the mind that can be under-
stood only by objective, non-prejudiced observation.

Awareness has no frontier; it is a giving of your whole being, without exclusion.

21


--- PAGE 22 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

5
ih
if

Self-expression is
total, immediate,
without concep-
tion of time, and
you can only ex-
press that if you
are free, physical-
ly and mentally,
from fragmen-
tation.

22

Concentration is a narrowing down of the mind. But we are concerned with the total
process of living and to concentrate exclusively on any particular aspect of life, be-
littles life.

‘The “moment” has not yesterday or tomorrow. It is not the result of thought and,
therefore, has not time.

When, in a split second, your life is threatened, do you say, “Let me make sure my
hand is on my hip, and my style is ‘the’ style”? When your life is in danger, do you
argue about the method you will adhere to while saving yourself? Why the duality?

A so-called martial artist is the result of three thousand years of propaganda and
conditioning.

Why do individuals depend on thousands of years of propaganda? They may preach
“softness” as the ideal to “firmness,” but when “what is” hits, what happens? Ideals,
principles, the “what should be” leads to hypocrisy.

Because one does not want to be disturbed, to be made uncertain, he establishes a
pattern of conduct, of thought, a pattern of relationships to man. He then becomes a
slave to the pattern and takes the pattern to be the real thing.

Agreeing to certain patterns of movement to secure the participants within the gov-
‘erned rules might be good for sports like boxing or basketball, but the success of Jeet
Kune Do lies in its freedom, both to use technique and to dispense with it.

‘The second-hand artist blindly following his sensei or sifu accepts bis pattern. As a re-
sult, his action and, more importantly, his thinking become mechanical. His responses
become automatic, according to set patterns, making him narrow and limited.

Self-expression is total, immediate, without conception of time, and you can only ex-
press that if you are free, physically and mentally, from fragmentation.


--- PAGE 23 ---
‘THE FACTS OF JEET KUNE DO

1. The economy-tight structure in attack and defense
(attack: the alive leads / defense: sticking hands).
2. The versatile and “‘artless-artful,” “total” kicking and striking weapons.
3. The broken rhythm, the balf-beat and the one or three-and-a-half beat
(JKD's rhythm in attack and counter).
4. Weight training and scientific supplementary training plus all-around fitness.
5. The “JKD direct movement” in attacks and counters — throwing from where it
is without repositioning.
6. The shifty body and light footwork,
7. The “un-crispy” stuff and unassuming attacking tactics.
8. Strong in-fighting — a. shifty blasting
b. throwing
c. grappling
4. immobilizations
9. All-out sparring and the actual contact training on moving targets.
10. The sturdy tools through continuous sharpening.
111. Individual expression rather than mass product; aliveness rather than classicalism | nope marti

(true relationship). artists are more
12. Total rather than partial in structure. interested in the
13. The training of “continuity of expressive self” behind physical movements. root of martial

14. Loose power and powerful thrust-drive as a whole. A springy looseness but nota _—arts and not the
y different decora-
physically lax body. Also, a pliable mental awareness. Prosi
15. The constant flow (straight movement and curved movement combined —up and flowers or
down, curved left and right, sidesteps, bobbing and weaving, hand circles). leaves.
16. Well-balanced posture of exertion during movement, constantly. Continuity be-

tween near all-out and near all-loose.

THE FORMLESS FORM

I hope martial artists are more interested in the root of martial arts and not the differ-
ent decorative branches, flowers or leaves. It is futile to argue as to which single leaf,
which design of branches or which attractive flower you like; when you understand the
root, you understand all its blossoming,

Please do not be concemed with soft versus firm, kicking versus striking, grappling
versus hitting and kicking, long-range fighting versus in-fighting. There is no such thing
as “this” is better than “that.” Should there be one thing we must guard against, let it
be partiality that robs us of our pristine wholeness and makes us lose unity in the
midst of duslity.

R


--- PAGE 24 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

A
he
Af
ft

‘The height of
cultivation runs to
simplicity. Half-
way cultivation
runs to orna-
mentation.

24

In combative arts, it has been the problem of ripening. This ripening is the progressive
{integration of the individual with his being, his essence. This is possible only through
self-exploration in free expression, and not in imitative repetition of an imposed pat-
tern of movement.

‘Thore are styles that favor straight lines, then there are styles that favor curved lines
and circles. Styles that cling to one partial aspect of combat are in bondage. Jeet
Kune Do is a technique for acquiring liberty; it is a work of enlightenment. Art is
never decoration or embellishment. A choice method, however exacting, fixes its prac-
titioners in a pattern. Combat is never fixed and is changing from moment to moment.
Working in patterns is basically a practice of resistance. Such practice leads to cloggi-
ness; understanding is not possible and its adherents are never free.

‘The way of combat is not based on personal choice and fancies. Truth in the way of
combat is perceived from moment to moment and only when there is awareness with-
out condemnation, justification or any form of identification.

Jeet Kune Do favors formlessness so that it can assume all forms and, since it has no
style, Jeet Kune Do fits in with all styles. As a result, Jeet Kune Do uses all ways and
is bound by none and, likewise, uses any technique or means which serves its end. In
this art, efficiency is anything that scores.

‘The height of cultivation runs to simplicity. Half-way cultivation runs to ornamenta-

tion.

It is not difficult to trim and hack off the non-essentials in outward physical structure;
however, to shun away, to minimize inwardly is another matter.

‘You cannot see a street fight in its totality, observing it from the viewpoint of a boxer,
a kung-fu man, a karateka, a wrestler, a judo man and so forth. You can see clearly
only when style does not interfere. You then see it without “like” or “dislike;”” you
simply see and what you see is the whole and not the partial,

‘There is “what is” only when there is no comparing and to live with “what i
be peaceful.



--- PAGE 25 ---
Fighting is not something dictated by your conditioning as a kung-fu man, a karate
man, a judo man ot what not. And seeking the opposite of a system is to enter another
conditioning.

A Jeet Kune Do man faces reality and not crystallization of form. The tool is a tool
of formless form.

No abode means that the ultimate source of all things is beyond human understanding,
beyond the categories of time and space. As it thus transcends all modes of relativity,
it is called “having no abode” and its qualities are applicable.

‘The fighter who has no abode is no more himself. He moves as a kind of automaton
He has given himself up to an influence outside his everyday consciousness, which is
not other than his own deeply buried unconscious, whose presence he was never
hitherto aware of.

Expression is not developed through the practice of form, yet form is a part of ex-
pression. ‘The greater (expression) is not found in the lesser (expression) but the
lesser is found within the greater. Having “‘no form,” then, does not mean having no
“form.” Having ‘‘no form” evolves from having form. “No form” is the higher,
individual expression.

No cultivation does not really mean the absence of any kind of cultivation. What it
signifies is a cultivation by means of non-cultivation. To practice cultivation through
cultivation is to act with conscious mind. That is to say, to practice assertive activity.

Do not deny the classical approach simply as a reaction, for you will have created
another pattern and trapped yourself there.

The physically bound go for puffing and straining and miss the delicate way; the intel-
lectually bound go for idealism and exotics and lack efficiency and actually seeing into
realities.

Many a martial artist likes “more,” likes “something different,” not knowing the
truth and the way is exhibited in the simple everyday movements, because it is here
they miss it. If there is any secret, it is missed by seeking.

@

A Jeet Kune Do
man faces reality
and not crystalli-
zation of form.

‘The tool is a tool
of formless form.

25


--- PAGE 26 ---
K
ih
|
fi

PRELIMINARIES

To become different from what we are, we must have some
awareness of what we are.

26


--- PAGE 27 ---
PRELIMINARIES

TRAINING

‘Training is Gne of the most neglected phases of athletics. Too much time is given to the
development of skill and too little to the development of the individual for participa-
tion. Training deals not with an object, but with the human spirit and human emotions.
It takes intellect and judgment to handle such delicate qualities as these.

‘Training is the psychological and physiological conditioning of an individual preparing
for intense neural and muscular reaction. It implies discipline of the mind and power
and endurance of the body. It means skill. It is all these things working together in
harmony.

‘Training means not only knowledge of the things which will build the body, but also
knowledge of the things which will tear down or injure the body. Improper training
will result in injuries. Training, then, is concerned with the prevention of injuries as
well as first-aid to injuries.

Fitness Program
‘Training deals
not with an ob-

1) Alternate Splits ject, but with the

2) Push-ups human spirit and
3) Running in Place human emotions.
4) Shoulder Circling

5) High Kicks

6) Deep Knee Bends
7) Side Kick Raises
8) Twisting Sit-ups
9) Waist Twisting

10) Leg Raises

11) Forward Bends

Everyday opportunities for exercises

# Take a walk whenever you can — like parking the car a few blocks away from
your destination.

# Avoid taking the elevator; climb the stairs instead.

# Cultivate your quiet awareness by imagining an opponent attacking you —
while you are sitting, standing, or lying down, etc. — and counter that attack
with various moves. Simple moves are the best.

# — Practice your balance by standing on one foot to put your clothes or shoes
on — or simply stand on one foot whenever you choose.

27


--- PAGE 28 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

(2) Forearm/Waist:

A rehearsal
of the skill be-
fore competition
commences fixes
in the athlete's
neuromuscular
coordinating
system the exact
nature of the im-
pending task.

Supplementary Training

(1) Sequence Training:

(3) Power Training:

sequence 1 (Mon, Wed. Fri.)
1) Rope jumping

2) Forward bend

3) Cat stretch

sequence 2 (Tues. Th. Sat.)
1) Groin stretch

2) Side leg raise

3) Jumping squat

sequence I (Mon. Wed. Fri.)
1) Waist twisting

2) Palm up curl

3) Roman chair

sequence 2 (Tues. Th. Sat.)
1) Leg raises

2) Reverse curl

3) Sit-up twist

1) Press lockout 4) Pull
5) Squat
3) Rise on toes 6) Shrug

2) Press start

WARMING UP.

4)
5)
6)

4)
5)
6)

4)
5)
6)

4)
5)
6)

Jumping jack
Squat
High kick

Shoulder circling
Alternate splits
Leg stretch — A,B.

Knee drawing
Side bend
Palm down curl

Leverage bar twist
Alternate leg raise
Wrist roller

Deadlift
Quarter squat
Frog kick

Warming up is a process which elicits the acute physiological changes that prepare the

organi

for strenuous physical performance.

IMPORTANT: To gain the greatest benefit from the warming-up procedure, the exer-
cises should imitate as closely as possible the movements which are to be used in the

event.

Warming up reduces the viscosity of a muscle, its resistance to its own movement. It
improves performance and prevents injury in vigorous activities by two essential

‘means:

1, A rehearsal of the skill before competition commences fixes in the athlete’s
neuromuscular coordinating system the exact nature of the impending task. It
also heightens his kinesthetic senses.

2. The rise in body temperature facilitates the biochemical reactions supplying

28


--- PAGE 29 ---
PRELIMINARIES

‘energy for muscular contractions. Elevated body temperature also shortens the
periods of muscular relaxation and aids in reducing stiffness.
Asa result of these two processes, there is an improvement in accuracy, strength and
speed of movement, and an increase in tissue elasticity which lessens the liability to

injury.

No fighter uses his leg violently until he warms it up carefully. The same principle is
equally applicable to any muscles that are to be used so vigorously.

‘The duration of the warm-up period varies with the event. In ballet, the dancers spend
two hours before the performance, commencing with very light movements and gradu-
ally increasing the intensity and range of motions until the moment before their
appearance. This, they feel, reduces the risk of a pulled muscle which would destroy
the perfection of their movements.

The athlete of more advanced years tends to warm up more slowly and for a longer
time. This fact may be due to greater need for a longer warm-up period, or it may be
because an athlete tends to get “smarter” as he gets older.

Proper posture
: is a matter of
Shan AMeatlonp Af tices, effective interior
organization of
oN . the body.
ns iN AS re
The BAITHAK (Savar) THe DAND (Car S7eercn)

ON-GUARD POSITION

Proper posture is a matter of effective interior organization of the body which can be
achieved only by long and well-disciplined practice.

She On- fever Saclay patted \
fo tae me ig God 0 POG — tot

Re Tee el he Giclee pal ons Cone,
(AP snares Cmplele mnaentnt Zrsealern

‘The on-guard position is that position most favorable to the mechanical execution of
all the total techniques and skills. It allows complete relaxation yet, at the same time,
gives a muscle tonus most favorable to quick reaction time.


--- PAGE 30 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

Ku
ih
4
fi

A correct posture does three things

1

a

It insures for the body and its several members a position which is most
‘mechanically favorable for the next move.

enables one to maintain a “poker body,” x body that reveals no more of its
intended movements than a “poker face” reveals the cards of a player.

It puts the body under that particular tension or degree of tonus which will be
most favorable to quick reaction and high coordination,



--- PAGE 31 ---
PRELIMINARIES

‘ase and relaxation, combined with smoothness of movement

‘The position adopted should be the one found to give maximum |
atall times. |

‘The on-quard position must, above all, be a “proper spiritual
attitude” stance.

‘The Head
In Western boxing, the head is treated as if it wore a part of the trunk, generally, with

a


--- PAGE 32 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

no independent action of its own. In close-in fighting, it should be carried vertically,
with the point of the chin pinned to the collarbone and the side of the chin held
against the inside of the lead shoulder. ‘The chin does not go all the way down to meet
the shoulder, nor does the shoulder come all the way up. They meet halfway. ‘The

ja shoulder is raised an inch or two and the chin is dropped an inch or two.

The point of the chin is not tucked into the lead shoulder except when angling the head
back in an extreme defensive position. Tucking the point of the chin into the lead
shoulder turns the neck into an unnatural position, takes away the support of the
muscles and prevents straight bone alignment. It also tenses the lead shoulder and arm,
preventing free action and causing fatigue.

With the chin dropped and pinned tight to the collarbone, the muscles and bone struc-
ture are in the best possible alignment and only the top of the head is presented to the
opponent, making it impossible to be hit on the point of the chin.

‘The Lead Arm and Hand

The shoulder is loose and the hand is held slightly lower, relaxed and ready for attack-
hand always in iP€- The entire arm and shoulder must be loose and relaxed so that the fighter will be
some subtle mo- able to snap or whip out the lead in rapier-like thrusts. The hand position changes fre-
tion for easier quently from the low back fist position to about shoulder height and as far to the out-
initiation. _side of the lead shoulder as possible without raising the elbow. Keep the lead hand

always in some subtle motion for easier initiation.

Keep the lead

‘The preference for a low-line position with absence of an extended lead is because most
people are weak in low-line defense. Also, with the absence of an extended lead, many
preparations on same are useless. (The bead now becomes a moving target, augmented
by sensitive distance.) So, if the opponent’s offensive game is based on these prepara-
tory movements, he is severely handicapped and partly checked.

‘The elongated guard can prove a dangerous weakness in both attacks and defense.
In attacks:
1, _ Necessitates withdrawing the arm, thus telegraphing (unlike a coiled spring).
2. Needs preparation for hooks.
In defense:
1. Uncovers the lead side of the body.
2. ‘The opponent knows where it is and can maneuver all around it.
3. An extended hand offers itself for immobilization.
‘Thus, adopt the recommended position to keep the potentialities of your lead reach a
secret.

32


--- PAGE 33 ---
PRELIMINARIES

‘The Rear Arm and Hand

The rear elbow is held down and in front of the short ribs. The rear forearm covers the
solar plexus. ‘The open palm of the rear hand faces the opponent, and is positioned
between the opponent and the rear shoulder, in line with the lead shoulder. The rear
hand may also rest lightly upon the body. ‘The arm should be relaxed and easy, ready
to attack or defend. Either or both hands may perform a circular “weaving” motion.
‘The important thing is to keep them moving, but retain cover.

‘The Trunk

‘The position of the trunk is controlled primarily by the position of the leading foot and
leg. If the leading foot and leg are in the correct position, the trunk automatically
assumes the proper position. The one important thing about the trunk is that it should
form a straight line with the leading leg. As the leading foot and leg are turned inward,
the body rotates in the same direction, which presents a narrow target to the opponent.
If, however, the leading foot and leg are rotated outward, the body is squared toward
the opponent, presenting a large target. For defensive purposes, the narrow target is
advantageous, while the square position lends itself better to some attacks.

Stance

‘The semi-crouch stance is the perfect stance for fighting because you are braced but are,
at all times, in a comfortably balanced position from which you can attack, counter, or
defend without preliminary movement. This stance may be referred to as the ‘‘small
phasic bent-knee stance.”

SMALL: Means appropriateness, not over-extended steps nor insufficient length
of stepping. Small quick steps for speed and controlled balance in
bridging gap to opponent, not distinctive enough for opponent to time.

PHASIC: A stage or interval in a development or cycle, not still or static, but
constantly changing.

BENT-KNEE: Ensures readiness in motion at all times.

‘The pattern of bent knees, crouched trunk, slightly forward center of gravity and par-
tially flexed arm is characteristic of “readiness” in many sports.

At any time, the lead foot should be hampered as little as possible. If too much weight
is on it, it will be necessary to transfer that weight to the rear leg before starting the
attack. This movement involves a delay and also warns the opponent.



--- PAGE 34 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

Balance is the
most important
consideration in
the on-guard
position.

34

FUNDAMENTAL POSITIONING is the foundation.

Fundamental suggests:
1. Simple but effective organization of oneself mentally and physically.
2. Ease, comfort and body feel during maintenance of the “spiritual stance
3. Simplicity. Movement with no strain. Being neutral, it has no commitment in
directional course or exertion.
Positioning suggests:
1. A state of movement as opposed to a static position, an “established” form or
attitude,
2, Repositioning, especially with small phasic movement, resulting in further dis-
organization of the opponent's sustained watchfulness.
3. Adaptation to opponent’s watchfulness.

Springiness and alertness of footwork is the key theme. The rear heel is raised and
cocked, ever ready to pull the trigger into action. You are never set or tensed, but are
ready and flexible.

‘The primary purpose of JKD is kicking, hitting and applying bodily force. Therefore,
the use of the on-guard position is to obtain the most favorable position for the
above-mentioned.

To hit or to kick effectively, it is necessary to shift weight constantly from one leg to
the other. This means perfect control of body balance. Balance is the most important
consideration in the on-guard position.

Naturalness means easily and comfortably, so all muscles can act with the greatest speed
‘and ease. Stand loosely and lightly, avoid tension and muscular contraction. Distinguish
between drilling comfort and personal comfort. Thus, you will both guard and hit with
more speed, precision and power.

You are all back, elbows, forearms, fist and forehead. You look more on the order of a
cat with its back hunched up and ready to spring, except that you are relaxed. Your
opponent hasn't much to shoot at. Your chin is tucked between your shoulders. Your
elbows protect your sides. You are partially contracted in the middle. ‘The on-guard
position is the safest position.

Thus:
1. _ Use tools that will least deviate from the on-guard position.


--- PAGE 35 ---
PRELIMINARIES,

2. Practice instantaneous explosion from neutrality and retain neutrality in
commitment, all into one constant smooth flow.

3. Practice constantly to apply all tools from the on-guard position and return
to the on-guard position with all possible rapidity. Shorten the gap time
between position and execution more and more. Base, speed, relay.

Above all, do not lay down restricting rules.

PROGRESSIVE WEAPONS CHARTS

Because of their advanced position, your leading foot and hand constitute at least 80
per cent of all kicking and striking (they are halfway to the target before starting). It

—~\

want

Above all, do
not lay down re-
fo stricting rules.

Lhe fhe Colom, Hyer Aman
Crile an 0 Lorre teccnpeee
: fob tas spore aborke

/ \ ated be Pele topoe

' eC Ae eens

. , % )
i
“&

is important Uhat they can strike with speed and power singly or in combinations. Also,
they must be reinforced by equal precision of the ear foot and hand.

35


--- PAGE 36 ---
i
RIGHT LEAD STANCE
1 2 3 4 5
P
aed
Hee fee =: |
le
\weds
|
ie |
ald

LEFT LEAD STANCE

LEFT LEADING WEAPONS,


--- PAGE 37 ---


--- PAGE 38 ---


--- PAGE 39 ---
A) Fe ye iter, |
Gur) eee an
hae or? nal OAS etn aie af ees es

EX LOR <a
GOLF ALA



--- PAGE 40 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

SOME TARGET AREAS

SHAME TAP CLIT TGLMS MANS
ROE BAIR EA CHET TAD ALAS
BALHO wFGhsE MALRARF ER
RSP eA ORES Paes bees Ee
FAPILK FPR LEAMA ONLERS
ERAAK GH BEL AFR ERRATA OAT
BUG E UALS LEDM IU LT SR
oe ERT HEE EAL A Btu we
HYOV UAE RL MD ATER
AW PUM LATIR Bt OR Rat
PREDBKLG OMIA RELSMREDIB®
FRR ETARA RETA PURER TA
BL ESA BM teed LARA TG
AE ARORA RAK IO KIO

Of The Head :-~

40

MIkS (3) At BS
ak F 9k
Oa 25 4
Wa # Ke, @a He

INK FT (HRY

RSE (9 BRM TE

OE FE (6004 Fortes
Ogu Hd Og 8 LA
(OR At the OB EAR

6) $99 a
ORME F
OD 2g

ORFF



--- PAGE 41 ---
The Fitat Two Prinary Targets ;

eee aR Ah. of —

a



--- PAGE 42 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

\

ff
fi

QUALITIES

It’s not daily increase but daily decrease—hack away the
unessentials!

42


--- PAGE 43 ---
QUALITIES a

COORDINATION

Coordination is by all means one of the most important considerations in any study of
proficiency in sports and athletics. Coordination is the quality which enables the indi-
vidual to integrate all the powers and capacities of his whole organism into an effective
doing of an act.

Before movements can take place, there must be a change of muscular tension on both
sides of the joints to be moved. ‘The effectiveness of this muscular teamwork is one of
the factors which determine limits of speed, endurance, power, agility and accuracy in
all athletic performances.

In static or slow resistive activities, such as executing a handstand or supporting a heavy
barbell, the muscles on both sides of the joints act strongly to fix the body in the
desired position. When rapid motion takes place, as in running or throwing, the

muscles closing the joints shorten and those on the opposite side lengthen to permit

the movement. There is still tension on both sides, but on the lengthening side, it is
considerably reduced.

Any excessive tension in the lengthening muscles acts as a brake and thereby slows and _‘the expert athlete
weakens the action. Such antagonistic tension increases the energy cost of muscular
‘work, resulting in early fatigue. When a new task with a demand that is different in siahonal effet.
intensity of load, rate, repetition or duration is undertaken, an entirely new pattern of

“neurophysiological adjustment” must be acquired. ‘Thus, the fatigue experienced in

new activities is not just from using different muscles but is also due to the braking

caused by improper coordination.

‘The outstanding characteristic of the expert athlete is his ease of movement, even

during maximal effort. The novice is characterized by his tenseness, wasted motion and
excess effort. That rare person, the “natural athlete,” seems to be endowed with the
ability to undertake any sport activity, whether he is experienced in it or not, with

ease. The ease is his ability to perform with minimal antagonistic tension. It is more
present in some athletes than in others, but can be improved by all.

‘The fighter whose movements seem awkward, who never seems to find the proper
distance, is always being timed, never “out-guesses” his opponent, and always gives
warning of his intentions before they become serious, is suffering chiefly from a lack
of coordination. The well-coordinated fighter does everything smoothly and grace-
filly. He seems to glide in and out of distance with a minimum of effort and a maxi-
‘mum of deception. His timing is usually good because his own movements are so

43


--- PAGE 44 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

A;
‘s
ff
fi

Learning co-
ordination is a
matter of train-
ing the nervous
system and not a
question of train-
ing muscles.

“4

rhythmical they tend to establish complementary rhythm on the part of his opponent,
a rhythm he can break to his own advantage because of his perfect control of his own
muscles. He seems to out-guess his opponent because he usually takes the initiative and,
to a large extent, forces the reactions of his opponent. Above all, he makes his move-
ments with a purpose, rather than with a doubting hope, because he has confidence in
himself.

Muscles have no power to guide themselves, but the manner in which they act, and

consequently the effectiveness of our performances, depends absolutely on how the
nervous system guides them. Thus, a badly executed move is the result of impulses
sent to the wrong muscles by the nervous system, or sent a fraction of a second too
soon or too late, or sent in improper sequence or in poorly apportioned intensity.

Well-executed movement means the nervous system has been trained to the point
where it sends impulses to certain muscles, causing these muscles to contract at exactly
the proper fraction of a second. At the same time, impulses to the antagonistic muscles
are shut off, allowing those muscles to relax. Properly coordinated impulses surge with
just the exact intensity required and they stop at the exact fraction of a second when
they are no longer needed.

‘Therefore, learning coordination is a matter of training the nervous system and not a
question of training muscles. ‘The transition from totally uncoordinated muscular
effort to skill of the highest perfection is a process of developing the connections in the
nervous system. Psychologists and biologists tell us that the billions of elements in the
nervous system are not in direct connection with each other, but that the fibers of one
nerve cell intertwine with those of other cells in such close proximity that impulses can
pass from one to others by a process of induction. This point at which the impulse
passes from one nerve cell to another is called the “synapse.” The synapse theory ex-
plains why the baby who displayed totally uncoordinated responses at the sight of a
ball eventually becomes the big league ball-player.

‘Training for skill (coordination) is purely a matter of forming proper connections in
the nervous system through practice (precision practice). Each performance of an act
strengthens the connections involved and makes the next performance easier, more cer-
tain, and mote readily done. Likewise, disuse tends to weaken any pathways that have
been formed and makes doing of the act more difficult and uncertain ( constantexer-
cises). Thus, we can attain skill only by actually doing the thing we are trying to learn.
We learn solely by doing or reacting. When learning to form pathways, be sure the
actions are the most economical as well as the most efficient use of energy and motion,

To become a champion requires a condition of readiness that causes the individual to


--- PAGE 45 ---
QUALITIES .

approach with pleasure even the most tedious practice session. ‘The more “ready” the
person is to respond to a stimulus, the more satisfaction he finds in the response, and
the more “unready” he is, the more annoying he finds il to be forced to ack.

IMPORTANT: Do not practice finely skilled movements itfler you are tired, for you
will begin to substitute gross motions fox finer ones and generalized efforts for specific
ones. Remember, wrong movements Lend to supervene and the athlete's progress is sel,
back. Thus, the athlete practices fine skills only while he is fresh. When be becomes
fatigued, he shifts to tasks employing gross movements designed principally to develop
endurance.

PRECISION

Precision of movement means accuracy and generally is used in Uhe sense of exactness
in the projection of a force.

Precision is made up of controlled body movements. These movements should cventu- Precision

ally be executed with a minimuro amount of strength and exertion, while still achieving Of Movement
the desired result. Precision can only be attained through a considerable amount of and generally i
practice and training on the part of both the beginner and the experienced fighter. used in the sense
of exactness in
the projection
Skill is best acquired by learning accuracy and precision first with speed before the skill fa foree.

act is atlempted with much power and speed,

Anirror is a definile aid to achieving precision by providing a constant check on pos-
ture, hand position and technical movement.

POWRR

‘To be accurate, the striking or Uhrowing skills should be executed from a hody base that |
possesses enough strength to maintain adequate balance during the action.

‘To appropriately incorporate momentum with mechanical advantage, neural impulses
are sent Lo the working muscle to bring a sufficient number of fibers into action at pre-
cisely the right Lime, while impulses to. the antagonistic muscles are reduced to lessen
the resistance — all acting to improve efficiency and to make the best use of available
power.

a5


--- PAGE 46 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

Ki
ib
ff
ii

The best form
of endurance ex-

46

When approaching an unfamiliar task, the athlete Lends Lo overmobilize his muscular
forces, exerting more effort than required. This is a lack of “knowledge” by the reflec-
tive neuromuscular coordinating system,

A powerful athlete is not a strong athlete, but one who can exert his strength quickly.
Since power equals force Limes speed, if the athlete Jeans to make faster movements
he increases his power, even though the contractile pulling strength of his muscles
remains unchanged. ‘Thus, a smaller man who can swing faster may hit as hard or as
far as the heavier man who swings slowly.

‘The athlete who is building muscles through weight training should be very sure to work
adequately on speed and flexibility at the same time. Combined with adequate speed,
flexibility and endurance, high levels of strength cad to excellence in most sports. In
combat, without the prior attributes, a strong man will be like the bull with its colossat
strength futilely pursuing the matador or like a low-geared truck chasing a rabbit.

ENDURANCE

Endurance is developed by hard and continuous exercise which exceeds the “steady”
physiological state and produces near exhaustion, temporarily. Considerable respira-
tory and muscular distress should develop.

‘The best form of endurance exercise is the performance of the event. Of course, run-
ning and shadow boxing are necessary supplementary endurance exercises, but you
should do them with broken rhythm, broken neurophysiological adjustment.

Most beginning athletes are unwilling to drive themselves hard enough. They should
punish themselves and then rest adequately, only to increase the output of effort after
the rest, Long hours of work made up of many short, high-speed efforts interspersed
with periods of milder activity seem to be the best endurance-training procedure.

Four hypotheses for extra-endurance sports.

1. Endurance can be acquired through a rather extensive succession of sprints
interspersed with casier running.

2. One trains for an endurance that is specific to a particular rate of speed.

3. Extreme endurance training should include much more and longer work than
what has been customary. (Such “Spartan” training is for the champ.)


--- PAGE 47 ---
QUALITIES NS

4, An occasional change of pace should be included that employs different
movements and, to some degree, different muscle fibers.

Exercises for endurance development should be gradually and carefully increased. Six
weeks seem lo be a scanty minimum for sports that require considerable endurance and
six weeks are really only the beginning. The peak of achievement will be approached in
years.

Endurance is lost rapidly if one ceases to work at its maintenance.

BALANCE

Balance is the all-important factor in a fighter's altitude or stance. Without balance at
all times, he can never be effective

Balance is achieved only Uhrough correct body alignment. The fect, the legs, the trunk,

the head are ail important in creating and maintaining a balanced position. ‘They are

the vehicles of body force. Keeping the feet in proper relation to each other, as well as Endurance is

to the body, helps to maintain correct body alignment. lost rapidly if one
‘ceases to work at

= its maintenance.

‘Too wide a stance prevents proper alignment, destroying the purpose of balance but

obtaining solidarity and power at the cost of speed and efficient movement. A short

stance prevents balance as it does not give a basis from which to work. Speed results |
but at a loss of power and balance.

The secret of a proper balance in the proper stance is to keep the fect directly under the
body, which means they should be a medium distance apart. Either the weight is
balanced over both legs or (as in Western boxing) it is carried slightly forward over the
lead leg. ‘The lead leg is fairly straight and the knec is loose and easy. not Jocked. The
lead side of the body forms a straight line from the lead heel to the tip of the lead
shoulder. ‘This position permits relaxation, speed, balance and easy movement, as well
asa mechanical advantage, making possible tremendous power.

In general for athletic contests, a preparatory stance will include a “coiled” or semi-
crouched posture and a lowered, forward center of gravity. With Lhe bending of the
forward knee, the center of gravity moves forward a little. For general readiness, the
lead heel usually remains just touching the ground even after the knees bend. Slight
wound contact of the heel aids in balance and decreases tension.

a7


--- PAGE 48 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

$Y
A By not getting your feet crossed, you are not likely to be pushed off-balance or knocked

Always leave the space of @ natural step between your feet. By doing so, you are braced
and never standing on just one point

Postural habits

down because of bad footwork.

In general
for athletic con-
tests, a prepara

tory stance will i
clude a “coiled”

or semi-crouched
posture and a
lowered, for-
ward center

of gravity.

Lower the center of gravity.

Keep a base with lateral width,

Keep weight on the balls of the fect.

Knees ate rarcly straightened, even in running.

A center of gravity kept under delicate and rapid motion are characteristic
habits of athletes in games that require sudden and frequent changes of
direction.

gaene

These postural habits are characteristics of readiness in motion as well as static posture
‘The athlete displays these static and phasic motor habils before and immediately after
each act, in preparation for the next act. When sudden movement may be necessary,

the good athlete is rarcly caught with a straight knee or with other completely
straightoned joint angles.

From such hent-knee preparatory-running has come the
well-known statement, “The good athlote always tuns as if his pants need pressin;

48


--- PAGE 49 ---
QUALITIES

Balance is the contro! of one’s center of gravity plus the control and utilization of body
slants and unstable equilibrium, hence gravity pull, to facilitate movement. So, balance
‘might mean being able to throw one’s center of gravity beyond the base of support,
chase it, and never let it get away.

‘The short step and the glide, as contrasted with the hop or cross step, are devices to
keep the center of gravity. When it is necessary to move rapidly, the good man takes
small enough steps so that his center of gravity is rarely out of control.

Body slants in a preparatory position are counter-balanced with an extended arm, leg
or both.

‘One should seek good balance in motion and not in stillness.

‘The fighter’s center of gravity changes constantly, varying with his own actions and
those of his opponent.

‘The missing of a blow or intended kick means momentary loss of balance. That is why
the counter-fighter usually has the advantage, but the attacker will be fairly safe by
adopting the small phasic bent-knee stance. Practice counters the moment your oppo-
nent loses his balance, especially if he is the stand-up type.

Balance must be under control at all times so that the fighter will not lose his control
in the middle of an action.

hw é

# Foran attack, the center of gravity should imperceptibly be shifted to the
front foot in order to allow the back leg and foot freedom for the shortest,
fastest and most explosive lunge.

# Fora parry, the center of gravity should be shifted slightly to the rear foot
so that the distance is increased and more time is allowed for the parry and
riposte movements.

One should seek
‘g00d balance in

motion and not

in stillness,

43


--- PAGE 50 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

Always stay in balance to throw another kick or punch. Watch out for too much
commitment.

‘Training Aids

in combination, retreating and countering. Note their positioning for all types of hits
and kicks.

Feel yourself in a balanced stance. You should be able to make all your moves at walk-
ing pace if necessary. Fee! the difference by putting yourself in balanced and unbalanced
positions. Move forward, backward and sideways. Coordinate with striking and kick-
ing; make sure you get speed and power and, above all, a balanced position to keep up
or to speedily recover.

Ie Feel for the proper relation of the feet to each other and to the body while attacking

One of the finest exercises for the development of a sense of balance is undoubtedly not
ordinary haphazard skipping, but rather the real thing. First, skip on one foot, holding
the other in front of you; then skip on the other. After that, skip on alternate fect with
cach revolution of the rope (not as simple as it may appear) and work up to the highest
You shoula Possible speed. Keep the skipping going for three minutes (the duration of a round),
be able to make then rest for a minute and skip for another three minutes. Three rounds of skipping in
all your moves at _ variety of ways will form the opening for a good workout.
walking pace if
necessary.

BODY FEEL

Body Feel suggests a harmonious interplay of body and spirit, both inseparable.

Body Feel in Attack
PHYSICAL:

1. Consider balance before, during, after.
2. Consider air-tight defense before, during, after.
3. Learn to cut into the opponent’s moving tools and limit the ground for his
agility.
4. Consider aliveness.
MENTAL:

1. Allow the “wanting” to score the target.

2. Back yourself by alertness, awareness to sudden change to defense or counter.

3, Keep aneutral watchfulness at all times, always observing the opponent's
actions and reactions to fit in.

50


--- PAGE 51 ---
4, Learn to relay destructiveness (looseness, speed, compactness, ease) to
moving targets.

Body Feel in Defense

4s

Study the opponent's delivering method — signs of telegraphing.
bs

Learn to time the opponent's second, third moves — read his style and solve
the problem should simple attacks fail.

3. Read the opponent's moment of helplessness.

‘Take advantage of a common tendency to “reach” with spent tools.

5. Draw the opponent off balance into one’s sensitive aura while keeping your
‘own balance.

=

6. _Beable to express efficiency while moving backward and experiment with all
possibilities (sidestepping, curving, etc.). Stay in balance for finishing blows
and kick:

7. At the right moment, attack instantaneously with

a. correct self-synchronization
Asone _b._ right distance
c. right timing

GOOD FORM

Good form is the most efficient manner to accomplish the purpose of a performance
with a minimum of lost motion and wasted energy.

To conserve energy by using the least possible amount of energy to achieve a given
result, eliminate the unnecessary motions and muscle contractions which fatigue with-
‘out accomplishing any useful purpose.

The education of neuromuscular skill:

# The first step is to acquire the feeling of relaxation.
# The second step is to practice until this feeling can be reproduced at will.

# — The third step is to reproduce that feeling voluntarily in potentially
tension-creating situations.

The ability to feel contraction and relaxation, to know what a muscle is doing, is called
“kinesthetic perception.” Kinesthetic perception is developed by consciously placing
the body and its parts in a given position and getting the feel of it. This feeling of bal-

ance or imbalance, grace or awkwardness, serves as a constant guide to the body as it
moves.

QUALITIES

Body Feel
suggests a har-
monious interplay
of body and spirit
both inseparable,

st


--- PAGE 52 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

x
he

Good form is
the most efficient
manner to accom:
plish the purpose
of a performance
with a minimum
of lost motion
and wasted
energy.

82

Kinesthetic perception should be developed to such a degree that the body is uncom-
fortable unless it performs each motion with a minimum of effort to produce maxi-
mum results (apply to posture, too).

presenane

z = ne reacting oF RIA FIR

é : e Up PRECISION,

(tage D - eyrhea” Sync een
TON wnie nugneane
Speed rogtex’ ea

1g pees
a Itong 4:

rie aedity ro S86

; = TIMING, mo
(Sts De TING 0 ant PARES

A 3
% wa

Relaxation is a physical state, but it is controlled by the mental state. It is acquired by
the conscious effort to control the thought as well as the action pattern. It takes per-

ception, practice and willingness to train the mind into new habits of thinking and the
body into new habits of action.

Relaxation refers to the degree of tension in the musculature. The rule in sports is to
try to have no more tension in the acting muscles than is necessary to perform the act,
and to have as low a degree of tension in the antagonistic muscles as possible and still
maintain any necessary inhibitory control. Muscles are always in a slight state of ten-
sion and this is as they should be. But when they begin to “tighten up” too much, we
find vur speed and skill being handicapped. The main difficulty in such cases lies in the
over tension of the antagonistic muscles. A low degree of tension in the acting muscles
means less energy usage. Tense antagonistic muscles waste energy and cause stiffness


--- PAGE 53 ---
QUALITIES:

and/or resistance to the movement. In coordinated, graceful and efficient movement,
the opposing muscles must be able to relax and lengthen readily and easily.

Relaxation in sports depends upon the cultivation of mental poise and emotional con-
trol. A relaxed technician expends mental and physical energy constructively, convert-
ing it when it does not contribute to the solution of the problem and spending it freely
when it does. It does not mean he is lax and moves and thinks slowly. Neither does it
mean he is careless or indifferent. The relaxation desired is relaxation of muscles,
rather than of mind or attention.

Energy saved by sound mechanics of form can be utilized in the longer persistence or
the more forceful expression of the skill.

‘The older athlete regards form as a means of energy conservation and the great athlete
saves energy because his extra skill makes each motion more effective — he makes
fewer needless motions and his conditioned body uses less energy per movement.

Always train in good form. Learn to move easily and smoothly. Start your workout
with shadow boxing to loosen your muscles. At first concentrate on proper form; later,
work harder.

‘The mastery of proper fundamentals and their progressive application is the secret of
being a great fighter.

In most cases, the same tactic for each maneuver must be drilled on the opposite side of
the body for the proper balance in efficiency, but the chief consideration in developing
form is to make sure that no fundamental, mechanical principles are violated.

Economy of Motion

‘There is a best way to perform any task. A few of the principles that have been found
to be of importance in improving performance are as follows:

1. Momentum should be employed to overcome resistance.

2. Momentum should be reduced to a minimum if it must be overcome by
muscular effort.

3. Continuous curved motions require less effort than straight line motions
involving sudden and sharp changes in direction.

Energy saved by
sound mechanics
of form can be
utilized in the
longer persistence
or the more force-
ful expression

of the skill.

53


--- PAGE 54 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

ay
S
‘|

Good form
may be defined
the particular
technique which
enables the indi-
vidual to attain
maximum effi-
ciency in the
activity.

54

4, When the initiating muscles are unopposed, allowing free and smooth
motion, the movements are faster, easier and more accurate than restricted
or controlled movernents.

5. Work arranged to permit an easy and natural rhythm is conducive to smooth
and automatic performance.

6. Hesitation or the temporary and often minute cessation of motion should be
eliminated from the performance.

It is all right to change one’s style to adapt to various circumstances, but remember not
to change your basic form. By changing style, I mean switching your plan of attack.

Good form may be defined as the particular technique which enables the individual to
attain maximum efficiency in the activity.

Balance, too, is vital to good form. Whether it be a kick or a punch that you are throw-
ing, you will not have sustained power unless your balance and perfect timing give you
enough leverage.

Above all things, remember this: If you tighten up, you lose the flexibility and timing
which are so important to successful fighters. Therefore, consciously practice economi-
cal neuromuscular perceptive movements daily and keep relaxed at all times.

VISION AWARENESS

Learning great speed in visual recognition is a basic beginning. Your training should
include short, concentrated, daily practice in seeing quickly (awareness drills).

High levels of perceptual speed are the product of learning, not of inheritance.

A boy who is a little slow in reaction time, or in speed of delivery, may compensate for
this slowness through quick seeing.

‘Speed of perception is somewhat affected by the distribution of the observer's atten-
tion — fewer separate choices, faster action. When the cue to be recognized is likely to


--- PAGE 55 ---
QUALITIES

bbe one of several, each of which requires a different response, the time is lengthened.
Choice reaction takes longer than simple reaction. This is the basis for training the tools
in terms of neurophysiological adjustment toward instinctive economy. Instinctive
movement, being the simplest, is the quickest and most accurate.

Progression from volition to reflex control is when an athlete’s awareness is shifted from
small details (mechanical performance) to larger ones, and finally to the whole action,
without a thought given to any single part.

A habit of diffusing the attention over a wider area helps the offensive passer to see
openings more quickly.

For most rapid perception, attention must be at its maximum focus on the area of the
thing to be perceived (j.e.: “Get-set!” takes advantage over an opponent who lacks this
“get-set” preparation).

Experiments indicate that auditory cues, when occurring close to the athlete, are
responded to more quickly than visual ones. Make use of auditory cues together with
visual cues, if possible. Remember, however, the focus of attention on general move-
ment produces faster action than focus on hearing or seeing the cue.

Train yourself to cut down unnecessary choice-reactions (minimize yourself naturally)
while giving your opponent a variety of possible responses.

A good man is continually trying to force his opponent into the slower, choice-teaction
situation.

Strategies of distracting attention (fakes and feints) are athletic devices to direct the
opponent's attention and to make him hesitate before he can be sure of his cue to act.
‘Of course, an additional advantage is gained if the opponent can be induced to make a
preliminary motion in an appropriate direction.

‘The offensive opponent who can hit or kick only from one side permits the defensive
‘opponent the faster action of a one-sided focus of attention.

A person reacts to a quick motion toward his eyes by instinctively blinking. Such in-
stinctive blinking must be controlled in practice or else the opponent, if aware that

High levels of
perceptual speed
are the product of
learning, not of
inheritance.

55


--- PAGE 56 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

the fighter closes his eyes when threatened, may provoke this reaction and utilize the
moment of blindness for a hit or kick.

ja Central vision means that the eyes and attention are fixed on one point. In peripheral

vision, although the eyes are fixed on one point, the attention is expanded to a larger
field. Central vision may be thought of as being sharp and clear, while peripheral
vision is more diffuse,

In combat, a student must learn to expand his attention over the entire area by making
full use of his peripheral vision.

Exercise: ‘The teacher extends his index finger and instructs his student to con-
centrate on the point of the finger. He then begins moving the index
finger of his other hand into the student’s field of vision and slowly
describes letters and numerals with it. The student should be able to
expand his attention sufficiently to recognize the figures without
changing the focus of his eyes.

ean ‘The field of vision is enlarged by distance and diminished at close-range. Also, it is
trying to force generally easier to follow the opponent's footwork than his hand work, since the foot
his opponent in- moves relatively slowly compared to the more rapidly moving hand,
to the slower
choice-reaction

situation,

SPEED

Types of speed:

1. Perceptual speed. Quickness of eye to see openings and to discourage the
opponent, confusing him and slowing him down.


--- PAGE 57 ---
QUALITIES

2, Mental speed. Quickness of mind to select the right move to frustrate and

counter the opponent.

Initiation speed. Economical starting from the right posture and with the

correct mental attitude.

4. Performance speed. Quickness of movement in carrying the chosen move
into effect. Involves actual muscle contraction speed.

5. Alteration speed. The ability to change direction midstream. Involves con-
trol of balance and inertia. (Use small phasic bent-knee stance.)

Desirable characteristics to promote speed:

1. Mobility
Spring, resilience, elasticity

3. Resistance to fatigue (i.e.: stamina and physical fitness)
4. Physical and mental alertness

5. Imagination and anticipation

s

‘Overall tension

Exercises which increase skill and flexibility of both hand and footwork are indispen- and unnecessary
sable building blocks for the fighter. Many fighters fail to appreciate how much true muscular con-
speed depends on economy of motion (i.e.: good form and good coordination). Thus, — tractions act as
constant mechanical drill (practicing the activity) is essential. A certain amount of brakes, reducing,
emotional stimulation helps as well. speed and dissi-

pating energy.

Shadow boxing is a good agility exercise as well as a method for building up speed.
Keep your mind on the job! Imagine that your worst enemy, if you happen to
have one, is there in front of you and go out to give him all you've got. Use your
imagination to the utmost; try to anticipate the moves your phantom rival will
endeavor to put across and work yourself up into a real fighting frame of mind.
Shadow boxing helps wind, speed, gives ideas and helps the mind fix boxing moves
ready for use when they are most wanted.

Economy of form and relaxing the muscles add to speed. One of the greatest adjust-
ments the novice athlete must make in competition is to overcome the natural
tendency to try too hard — to hurry, strain, press and try to blast the whole fight at
once. As the athlete forces himself to give everything he has to the performance, his
mental demands exceed his physical capacities. The result may be described as
generalized rather than specific effort. Overall tension and unnecessary muscular con-
tractions act as brakes, reducing speed and dissipating energy. The body performs
better when the athlete lets it go than when he tries to drive it. When the athlete is
running as fast as he can, he should not feel as though he ought to be running faster.

37


--- PAGE 58 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE

#
be
al

‘The whiplike
or coiled-spring
action of the hu-
man body in its
striking (throw-
ing) movement-
pattern is a re-
markable phe-
nomenon.

58

Elements that make greater speed possible:

# — Preliminary warming up to reduce viscosity, increase elasticity and flexibility,
and tune the system to a higher physiological tempo (heart rate, blood flow
and pressure, respiratory adjustment).

Preliminary muscular tonus and partial contraction

A suitable stance.

Proper attention focus.

Reduction of stimuli-reception to rapid perceptual habits and reduction of
the resultant movements to fast-reacting habit patterns.

ee ee

After momentum in a throwing or elliptical striking movement has been generated by
a long radius and a long arc in the swing, the speed may be increased without applying
additional force by suddenly shortening the radius of the are. This effect is seen in the
“pull-in” at the last of the arc in the hammer throw, in the backward thrust against the
forward leg by the batter in baseball, and so on. Snapping a towel or a whip are com-
mon examples of the same “shortened lever” principle.

‘The whiplike or coiled-spring action of the human body in its striking (throwing) move-
ment-pattern is a remarkable phenomenon. The movement of the body may start with
a push of the toes, continue with a straightening of the knees and the trunk, add the
shoulder rotation, the upper arm swing, and culminate in a forearm, wrist and finger
snap. The timing is such that each segment adds its speed to that of the others. The
shortened lever principle is used to accentuate many of the particular speeds of this
uncoil or whip. The rotation of each segment around its particular joint-fulcrum is
made at high speed for that particular part; but each segment rate is accelerated tre-
mendously because it rotates around a fulcrum already highly accelerated.

In throwing a ball, all the accumulated speeds of the body are present at the elbow
when the forearm snaps over its fast-moving elbow-fulcrum. Most of the distance-
throwing or arched-striking acts illustrate these speed principles. One does not “hit
with his feet” but he does start the momentum with his feet.

An important aspect of this multiple action of acceleration is the introduction of each
segment movement as late as possible in order to take full advantage of the peak accel-
eration of its fulcrum. The arm is kept so far behind that the chest muscles pulling
against it are tensed and stretched. The final wrist snap is postponed until the last
instant before release or, in striking, before contact. In football, the punter puts the
last snap into his knee and foot as, or a shade after, he makes contact with the ball. It
is this last moment acceleration that is meant by “block through the man’” in football
or “punch through the man” in boxing. The principle is to preserve the maximum
acceleration up to the last instant of contact. Regardless of distance, the final phase of
‘a movement should be the fastest. Maintaining this increasing acceleration as long as



--- PAGE 59 ---
there is contact is sound. This concept, however, is sometimes confused with the idea
of a full, free, uninhibited motion of body inertia after the contact is over. This latter
principle is sound only when such relaxed follow-through will not interfere with the
speed of the next act.

Speed is a complex aspect. It includes time of recognizing and time of reacting. The
more complex the situation to which one reacts, the slower one is likely to be. Thus,
the effectiveness of feints.

‘The athlete can accelerate his speed by learning proper awareness (attention focus) and
suitable preparatory postures. The rate at which he can contract his muscles is an
important aspect in his relative speed.

Certain physical principles govern speed: shortened radius for quicker action, longer
arc for imparting greater momentum, centering weight for speed in rotation and multi-
plying speed by sequential but concurrently overlapping movements. The question an
individual athlete must answer is what kind of speed is most effective for his particular
work method.

Often, it’s not how fast it travels but how soon it gets there that counts.

TIMING

Speed and timing are complementary and speed in delivering a stroke will lose most of
its effectiveness unless the stroke is properly timed.

Reaction ‘Time

Reaction time is the time gap between a stimulus and the response.

It may be more completely defined in two ways:

1, The time that elapses from the occurrence of the stimulus, or cue to act, to
the beginning of the muscle movement.

2. The time from the occurrence of the stimulus to the completion of a simple
muscular contraction,

QUALITIES

Speed and timing
are complemen-

tary and speed in.
delivering a stroke
will lose most of
its effectiveness

unless the stroke
is properly timed.

59


--- PAGE 60 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

au
be
A
fi

tion (awareness)
to the motor act
can shorten the
response time.

60

Both definitions include the time taken for perception. If the perception is a simple
thing like hearing a gun or seeing a flag dropped, the amount of possible improvement
of perceptual speed is less. The techniques of preparatory movement can be improved
so that response time is shortened. The direction of one's attention (awareness) to the
motor act can shorten the response time. The remaining factor under the second defi-
nition is that of muscle contraction speed.

Total reaction consists of three elements:

1. The time required for the stimulus to reach the receivers (i.e.
tactile, etc.).

2. Plus the time required for the brain to relay the impulse through the proper
nerve fibers to the proper muscles.

3. Plus the time required for the muscles to get into action after receiving the
impulse.

udio, visual,

Reaction time becomes longer under the following conditions:

1. Not trained in any type of system
2, Tiredness

3. Absentmindedness

4, Emotionally upset (i.

anger, fear, etc.)

Opponent’s reaction time is lengthened.

Immediately after the completion of a technique.

When his stimuli are combined.

When he is inhaling.

When he withdraws his energy (involves attitude).

5. When his attention or sight is misdirected.

6. Generally, when he is physically or mentally off-balance.

pepe

Warming up, physiological condition and degree of motivation, all affect general
reaction time.

Movement Time

‘Movement time may be compared to fencing time. A period of fencing time (temps


--- PAGE 61 ---
QUALITIES
descrime) is the time taken by a fencer to perform one simple fencing movement.
Such simple fencing action may be a single arm movement or a step forward.
The time taken to make a simple movement will vary according to the speed of the
individual fighter.
‘Making an unexpected attack or the removal of the blade as the opponent is about to
engage it are examples of actions executed in time.
It is not necessary to execute an action in time with a quick or violent motion. A
movement that starts from rest without obvious preparation and proceeds smoothly
without hesitation may be so unexpected that it succeeds in hitting the opponent
before he is alerted.
Cause the opponent to lose a movement time:
1. By jamming him to disturb his rhythm. IA iba tighter
By checking and controlling him (immobilization). must sense rather
3. By drawing a preliminary reaction from him in the first half of your attack. than perceive his
4. By deflecting his movement and scoring. mica to strike,

An action, although technically perfect, can be frustrated by the opponent's preventive
hits. Therefore, it is absolutely essential to time the attack at exactly the right moment,
psychologically or physically, when the opponent cannot avoid being hit.

‘Thus, timing means the ability to recognize the right moment and seize the opportunity
for an action. Timing can be analyzed through its physical, physiological and psycho-
logical aspects.

A hit may be made as the opponent is preparing or planning to move.

A hit may land when the opponent is in the midst of a movement.

A hit may land in the fluctuating cyclic events of tension.

A hit may be made when the opponent is not paying attention, when his
concentration flags.

eee

‘This perfect moment may be either seized instinctively or provoked consciously. A
good fighter must sense rather than perceive his chance to strike.

6


--- PAGE 62 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

K
A
i
fi

‘Timing a
blow is the secret,
of powerful
hitting.

62

Timing Exercises:

1. Practice keeping the proper distance.

2, Attack when your partner changes position or is retracting his weapon.

3. Practice the evasive thrust, a simple attack in time against the opponent’s
attempt at engagement. The evasive thrust must be practiced against the
simple, semi-circular and circular engagement.

Aim at quick hitting and do not sacrifice speed for power. A terrific kick and a power-
ful punch depend on two things: (a) leverage, (b) timing. Timing is an integral part
of leverage, but the reverse is not the case. One does not need strength or weight to hit
hard. Timing a blow is the secret of powerful hitting.

‘Timing one’s blows in boxing means the art of hitting the rival as he comes forward or
perhaps is lured into coming forward. The good fighter seems to out-guess his adver-
sary and, whenever possible, takes the initiative and influences the reaction of his oppo-
nent. Then, his actions are carried out purposefully and without hesitation. This
requires confidence and no one — repeat, no one — can be a really heavy hitter through
perfect timing unless he has complete faith in his own ability.

Broken Rhythm

Ordinarily, two fighters of equal ability can follow each other’s movements and, unless
there is a considerable difference in speed, they are very likely to stalemate each other.
‘The movements of attacking and defending work almost in rhythm with each other.
‘They have a sequential relationship which makes the proper timing of each movement
dependent on the previous movement. Although there is a slight advantage in the initia-
tive of the attack, it must also be backed by superior speed in order to land successfully.
However, when the rhythm is broken, speed is no longer the primary element in the
success of the attack or counterattack of the man who has broken the rhythm. If the
thythm has been well established, there is a tendency to continue in the sequence of
‘the movement. In other words, each man is “motorset” to continue the sequence. The
man who can break this rhythm by a light hesitation or an unexpected movement can
now score an attack or counterattack with only moderate speed; his opponent is motor-
set to continue with the previous rhythm and before he can adjust himself to the
change, he has been hit. That is why the stroke on time is usually a pretty stroke, for

it seems to catch its victim flatfooted.

‘Timing has to be felt and mastered as a psychological problem, even more than as a
fighting problem, for the breaking of the rhythm relies on the fact that the victim is
going to continue for a fraction of a second in the sequence of movements which has
suddenly been interrupted.


--- PAGE 63 ---
QUALITIES

Sometimes, timing involves attacking with many threatening movement (feints). If the
defender accepts this rhythm and attempts to parry these various threats, then a slight
hesitation will break the rhythm and provide the opportune moment to launch the final
attack. On other occasions, when your opponent is in the midst of making advances or
threatening movements on his own account, you may succeed in breaking the rhythm
by first apparently reacting as he expects and then suddenly launching a counterattack
when he thinks you should be following his feint. You should land, for he is motorset
to continue with his threats and cannot adjust himself to the necessity of parrying until
after you have scored. In general, timing here means that you initiate your attack or
movement when your opponent has started preparation of an attack. Thus, timing
becomes a question of taking advantage of the slight interval before he can readjust
himself to make a parry.

M9 LE PG mee
ae ae ee

Pacted

One-and-a-half beat

Any attack performed halfway through the opponent’s movement is said to occur on
the half-beat. When the fighter lulls his opponent's rhythm by inducing or performing
one full-count movement, he may then “break the trance” by striking on the half-beat.
This broken rhythm method will often catch the opponent mentally and physically off
tulance for defense.

Cadence

Speed, regulated to coincide with the adversary’s, is known as “cadence.
specific rhythm at which a succession of movements is executed.

Acorrectly judged cadence permits the calm control of every stroke. This contro! will
allow the fighter to select, with more ease, the movements of offense and defense which
will bring about a hit.

Remember that to land a hit, the defense has to be avoided. Excessive speed can catch

up with the opponent's parries. The attacker is then known as “having parried
himself.”

63


--- PAGE 64 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

Ku
be
ff

That little frag-
ment of time (one
beat in a cadence)

which is the most
suitable to aecom-
plish effective ac-
tion is called
“tempo.”

Ideally, a fighter should seek to impose his cadence on an opponent. This may be
achieved by intentionally varying the cadence of his own movements. For example, he
can deliberately establish a certain rhythm in his feints in a composite attack until the
defender is induced to follow that cadence.

By obtaining an edge of speed on the adversary, the fighter may lead him. In other
words, it is the adversary who continually will have to try to catch up. If one has a
sufficient margin of speed on hand, it is possible to maintain this advantage. To do so
must have a moral effect on the opponent who, finding himself subjected to his adver-
sary’s will in this important factor of speed, cannot fail to suffer in his confidence.

The preparation by a series of false attacks and feints, executed at a normal rhythm,
has the effect of lulling the opponent into a false sense of preparedness. It accustoms
his reactions to a cadence other than that which will be used for the attack itself.
Then, the movements comprising the final attack are suddenly accelerated and more
likely to find him lagging behind.

A very effective change of cadence is to slow down, instead of speed up, the final action
of a compound attack or riposte. This slowing of cadence can be pictured as a strike
whose delivery is begun, halted in its path forward and continued when the adversary
leaves the threatened line for another in the hope of finding the hand.

Speed, applied at the opportune moment, together with the correctly judged cadence
in the execution of the movement, will go a long way toward ensuring the success of a
stroke.

‘Tempo

The success of a movement, defensive or offensive, depends on whether we perform it,
at the right time ot not. We must surprise our opponent and catch the moment of his
helplessness.

‘That little fragment of time (one beat in a cadence) which is the most suitable to
accomplish effective action is called “tempo.”

From a psychological point of view, the moment of surprise and, from the physical
‘point of view, the moment of helplessness are the right moments to attack. This is the
true conception of tempo — choosing the exact psychological and physical moment of
weakness in an opponent.



--- PAGE 65 ---
QUALITIES

‘There are also tempo opportunities when the opponent makes conscious movement,
that is, when he steps forward, makes an invitation, goes into a bind, etc. In such and
similar cases, the moment for attack is when he is executing the movement because
until he finishes it, he cannot change to the reverse.

Every action at the peak of the art of fighting is tempo, but be careful that the adver-
sary does not mislead you by giving false tempo opportunities.

Attack when your opponent is preoccupied, when he is preparing his offensive, on his
advance, his absence of touch, his engagement and change of same. Such requires an
unceasing concentration and vigilance.

Regard your opponent’s concentration in terms of a graph and attack in the depressions,
in his moments of irresolution

The choice of time is the supreme factor in the success of an offensive. Develop it.
Even faultless technique and lightning rapidity will fail if the attack is launched “out of
time.”
We must surprise

our opponent and
‘The “how to” is important but to be successful necessitates the “why” and the “when.” catch the moment

of his helplessness.

Stop-hit

When the distance is wide, the attacking opponent requires some sort of preparation.
Therefore, attack him on his preparation of attack,

A stop-hit is a timed hit made against the adversary at the same time he is making an
attack. It anticipates and intercepts the final line of attack and is delivered in such a
way that the executant is covered, either by being in line behind the hit or by supple:
mentary covering. ‘To ensure success, it must have correct anticipation and timing, plus
precise placement.

Essentially, a stop-hit arrests the opponent in the development of his attack. It can be
direct or indirect. It may be used as he steps forward to kick or punch, when he is pre-
‘occupied with feinting, or between two moves of a complicated combination.

6


--- PAGE 66 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

Ay
he
é

stop-hit is the
stroke chosen
to deal with the
stepping prepa-
ration.

Stop-hit
i. On the opponent's preparation of stepping forward.
2. To stop his attack while his arm is still bent.
3. When the opponent feints very wide, exposing his guard.
4. Against an attack with wide, badly directed hand movements.
5. Before applying immobilization (using a direct or indirect stop-hit).
6. On the first feint from the on-guard position before lunging with a real

attack.

The stop-hit is an excellent means of defense against an opponent (especially against
his advanced parts and exposed lines) who attacks wildly with insufficient care to
covering or against one who just comes too close.

Correct appreciation of time and distance is essential to making an effective stop-hit.
While it is usually made with a straight thrust or kick, the stop-hit may also be part of
a disengagement or counter-disengagement, or may be done while ducking or slipping.

Sometimes the stop-hit necessitates some angulation of the body in order to dominate
the opponent’s hand.

The stop-hit oftentimes necessitates a step forward to land ahead of the opponent's
focus. It is advisable, at least, to lean forward as if to meet the attacker.

A stop-hit is more often useful and successful against attacks that begin with a step
forward, where the margin of time allowing for success is greater than against attacks
not preceded by a step. We can therefore say that generally the stop-hit is the stroke
chosen to deal with the stepping preparation.

A person should train himself to be constantly prepared to make a stop-hit during the
course of any movement of a phase, The successful introduction of a stop-hit not only
enables many valuable hits to be scored, but has a devastating moral effect on a forceful
and confident opponent. Train to stop-hit with great speed and accuracy from a

variety of angles.

Counter-time
It is not wise at all to attack without first having gained control of the opponent’s move-


--- PAGE 67 ---
QUALITIES

ment time or hand position. Thus, a smart fighter uses every means at his disposal,
patiently and systematically, to draw the stop-hit. It brings the adversary’s hand or
Jeg within his reach and gives him the opportunity to gain control of it.

The second-intention attack or “counter-time” is a premeditated movement generally
used against a fighter who has formed the habit of continually attempting stop-hits or
who attacks into the attack; that is to say, one who launches an attack as soon as his
‘opponent makes any offensive moment.

Counter-time is the strategy by which an opponent is induced or provoked to attack in
tempo, with the object of counter-timing or alternatively taking possession of the oppos-
ing hand or detaching it and executing a subsequent attack or riposte. It lies not so
much in drawing the stop-hit as in correctly timing the parry which deflects it, The
speed of the opponent's reactions will have to be found and his cadence judged.

Distance must be judged correctly to minimize the danger of being hit while within Ib isnot wise
reach of the opponent in order to land the final movement of the counter-time sequence at ait to attack

(the riposte). without first hav-
ing gained control
of the opponent’s
movement time

‘The success of a counter-time movement largely depends on concealing one’s real or hand position.

intentions and inducing the opponent to make his stop-hit with conviction, so that he
has little opportunity to recover when it is parried before the riposte lands.

The stop-hit may be drawn in a variety of ways:

# By use of invitation (simply exposing targets)
# By intentionally uncovered feints
# — By making false attacks with a half-lunge or merely by stepping forward.

It might be wise to riposte with opposition by immobilizing the opponent's stop-hit or
alternate weapons, or by attacking in an evasive manner (i.e.: From varying body posi-
tions or using other than direct attacks).

Watch out for his purposely launching a stop-hit as a feint or he will parry the riposte
and score with a counter-riposte. (He might induce one to use counter-time by show-
ing an apparent predilection for stop-hitting.)

67


--- PAGE 68 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

A
he
4

An excellent
moment to launch
an attack is when
the opponent is
Preparing an
attack.

Attacks and ripostes, however well-designed and executed, will generally fail unless they
are delivered at the right moment (timing) and at the right speed (cadence). A simple
example of the right choice of time is provided by an attack by disengagement. From
the normal on-guard position, a disengagement can be parried by a lateral movement of
the hand which travels a matter of a few inches, while the attacker’s hand has to travel
several feet to reach the target. Under these conditions, the fastest attack should be
parried by an even, slow defensive movement, This disparity in time will be aggravated
if the attack is directed on a side of the target toward which the defender’s hand is
already moving to close the lis

It is obvious that the attack should be timed to move toward a part of the target from
which the opponent's hand is moving, that is, into an opening rather than a closing line,
if it is to have the best chance of overcoming the disadvantage of time and distance to
which it is always subject.

Similarly, an excellent moment to launch an attack is when the opponent is preparing
an attack, His intention and hand movements will then be momentarily concentrated
more on attack than defense.

An attack on preparation is often effective against an opponent who maintains a par-
ticularly accurate distance measure and who is difficult to reach because he keeps just
out of attacking distance whenever an offensive movement is made. The attack can be
made after the opponent has been drawn within distance and induced to prepare an
attack by a short step back.

An attack on preparation must not be confused with an attack into an attack. The
former is made during the preparation and before the opponent’s attack begins, while
the attack into an attack is, in fact, a counter-offensive movement. A very exact choice
of distance and careful timing is required if the attack on preparation is to obtain
priority in time over the opponent's attack.

ATTITUDE

‘The state of the athlete's mind as he faces his event determines the degree of excess ten-
sion he will carry into the event. The athlete free from excess tension as he awaits his
performance is typically self-confident. He has what is commonly known as “a winning
attitude.” He sees himself as master of the athletic situation confronting him, To many
athletes, being a champion is a matter of “psychological necessity.” Fed by previous
successes and having completely rationalized previous failure, he feels himself a Triton
among minnows.



--- PAGE 69 ---
QUALITIES

Asan event approaches, the athlete often notices a feeling of weakness in his midsection
(butterflies in.his stomach), feels nauseated and may vomit; his heart pounds, he may
experience pain in his lower back, ‘The experienced athlete recognizes these sensations
not as an inner weakness, but as an inner surplus. ‘These signs indicate a preparedness
for violent activity. In fact, the athlete who expresses a feeling of euphoria before an
event is probably in a poor state of readiness. Many athletes call it “adrenalburger,” a
conditon affected by adrenomedullary activity, augmented by the stimulating effect

of the competitive situation.

If emotional control is not well-learned, critical moments in the fight when the emo-
tional tension is highest will result in loss of skill by the fighter. His muscles suddenly
must work against his own over-tense antagonistic muscles. He becomes stiff and
clumsy in his movements. Expose yourself to various conditions and learn.

Experience shows that an athlete who forces himself to the limit can keep going as long

as necessary. This means that ordinary effort will not tap or release the tremendous

store of reserve power latent in the human body. Extraordinary effort, highly emo-

tionalized conditions or a true determination to win at all costs will release this extra

energy. Therefore, an athlete is actually as tired as he feels and, if he is determined to

win, he can keep on almost indefinitely to achieve his objective. The attitude, “You The real competi-
can win if you want to badly enough,” means that the will to win is constant. No tor is the one who
amount of punishment, no amount of effort, no condition is too “tough” to take in Cons sane
order to win. Such an attitude can be developed only if winning is closely tied to the

practitioner’s ideals and dreams.

A practitioner must learn to perform at top speed all the time, not to coast with the
idea that he can “open up” when the time comes. The real competitor is the one who
gives all he has, all the time. ‘The result is that he works close to his capacity at all times
and in so doing, forms an attitude of giving all he has. In order to create such an atti-
tude, the practitioner must be driven longer, harder and faster than normally would be
required.

Use attitude to create:

Evasiveness with very light movement (but not passive!)
Devastating attacks

Speed

Natural dynamics

Deception and slipperiness

Stickiness and directness

Complete ease

Reger eNe


--- PAGE 70 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

‘

x
ih
sf
ft

TOOLS

Before I studied the art, a punch to me was just a punch, a
kick was just a kick. After I’d studied the art, a punch was

no longer a punch, a kick no longer a kick. Now that I
understand the art, a punch is just a punch, a kick is just a kick.


--- PAGE 71 ---
Western boxing is too over-daring because of restrictions on illegal and “unfair” tactics
as compared to the over-protectiveness of the Oriental martial arts caused by the no-
hold -barred, full bodily target. In addition, the no-contact practice of stopping the
attacks several inches in front of the target in the Oriental martial arts creates a
habitual false sense of distance, From this dust waving act in front of a moving target
rather than the timed explosion through a moving target springs negligence in the prac-
tice of evasive tactics. The evasive tactics are so much a part of an aggressive art such as
boxing. Slips, ducks, weaves are all a sort of aggressive defense without moving the
body out of range.

In realistic, total fighting, we must embody the practical elements of both of the above
tactics. We must use range as a protective device as well as use the evasive tactics of in-
fighting. Neither by itself is reliable enough for success in total fighting.

Evasive tactics combined with punishment can be applied in no-hold-barred fighting
during the opponent's final extended commitment and during the gaps between two
progressive exertions toward you. These tactics will serve to take the play away from
an aggressor or will initiate grappling.

In boxing, it is a correct maxim that a good offense is the best defense. A good offense
consists of leads, false moves and counterpunches supported by mobility, pressure and
generalship.

A good boxer is able to beat his opponent to the punch with lightning fast leads and
draw out his opponent’s counterpunches with feints in such a way as to make the
counterpunches miss. The opponent's miss leaves him out of position and an easy tar-
get for a counterpunch from the boxer doing the leading.

It is the ability to outsmart an opponent and out-maneuver him that is the skill and
science of the sport of boxing. To have this ability, you must understand hitting (and
kicking) and the different types of blows (and kicks) there are, and when and where
each type is best put to use. You must develop combinations of punches (and/or kicks)
that work well. As the result of long practice, you must become able to put your full
weight and strength into your punch (and kick). You must deliver the right blow at

the proper time, automatically.

When you have developed hitting (and kicking) into something automatic, it will become

instantaneous and your mind will be free to plan your battle as the fight progresses and
new situations arise. You can only reach this point of development if you have been

TOOLS

It is a correct
maxim that a
good offense is
the best defense,

n


--- PAGE 72 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

Attack by
deception,
especially,

is the attack
of the master.

2

willing to do the necessary training. That training grind is the most valuable thing box-
ing has to offer.

‘The elements of attack are all used to carry the attack through strategy, requiring speed,
deception, timing and judgment. They are the tools of the master craftsman who blends
them into perfect attacks.

Attack by deception, especially, is the attack of the master. The master boxer has at
his command techniques that bewilder and confuse the opponent, thereby creating
many openings. He feints his opponent into “knots.” He combines hitting with feints
in such a manner that both appear to be the same. He draws his opponent to him, fore
ing whatever he desires. Through defensive hitting and judicious movement, he keeps
his opponent off-balance. The master boxer has the ability to get in close and under-
stands the value of in-fighting. He has so perfected the shift that it is used for attack as
well as defense. Finally, he is the master of counter-fighting, for he knows when to
attack and when to allow attack. Scientific attack, then, is no simple matter, but re-
quires years of study and practice for its successful use.

In the process of attack, there are four basic methods that you will use often: leading,
feinting, drawing and in-fighting.

Leading

‘The master of attack must, know the value of a straight lead. He must know what is
liable to happen on any lead. He realizes that for every lead, there is an opening and for
every opening, a counter and for every counter, a parry or a counter-time. These things
he understands, but he also knows how and when to lead with comparative safety.

Leading with the forward hand, guarding with the rear hand, while moving to the side,
makes negligible any opening that ordinarily results from a straight forward lead with
the hand.

Feinting
Feinting is characteristic of the expert fighter. It requires using the eyes, the hands, the
body and the legs in a single effort to deceive an opponent. These movements are really
decoys and if the opponent attempts to adjust his defense, the expert takes advantage

of the openings created. Feinting is also used to ascertain what the opponent's reaction
will be to each movement.


--- PAGE 73 ---
TOOLS

Feinting creates only momentary openings. ‘To be able to take advantage of these open-
ings means instant reflex action or foreknowledge of what openings will be created by
certain feints, Buch familiarity is presupposed by practice, for only through the actual
practicing of many feints against many kinds of opponents may a general reaction
tendency be determined. If an opening is created by a certain feint, that opening should
not be used until a clean, sure blow will result. A good fighter knows what openings
will result before he feints and makes use of his knowledge by initiating his follow-up
action almost before the opening results. Whenever two fighters of equal speed,

strength and skill are matched, the one who is the master of the feint will be the

winner.

‘The essential elements in feinting are rapidity, change, deception and precision, followed
by clean crisp blows. Feints used too often in the same way will enable the opponent
to time them for a counterattack, thus defeating their very purpose.

Feints against the unskilled are not as necessary as against the skilled. Many different

combinations of feints should be practiced until they are natural movements. Whenever two

fighters of equal
speed, strength
Drawing and skill are
matched, the
Drawing is closely allied to feinting. Whereas in feinting an opening is created, in draw- One who is the
ing some part of the body is left unprotected in order that a particular blow will be led ‘Master of the

fA a feint will be
by the opponent, thus developing the opportunity to use a specific counter. tee tines,

Feinting is only a part of drawing. Drawing uses the method of strategy and the method
of crowding or forcing. Being able to advance while apparently open to attack, but

ready to counter if successful, is a phase of fighting that few ever develop. Many
fighters refuse to lead. Then, to be able to draw or force a lead becomes very
important.

Infighting

This is the art of fighting at close range. Not only does it take skill to get in close, but
it takes skill to stay there. To get inside, it is necessary to slip, bob and weave, draw
and feint.

Because of the many variables, fighting is a careful game. It should be readily under-
stood that each hit must be painstakingly and patiently prepared. Yet, it is generally
fatal to start a bout with a set plan. Stay actively aware, but ever flexible,

2B



--- PAGE 74 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

<U SOME WEAPONS FROM JKD
LEG TECHNIQUES 4. Reverse one-two hook
A oe KICK (Primarily lead leg) 5. Double leaping hook
fe, 1. Downward side kick 6. Step-back hook
(shin/lenee and thigh) 7. Vertical hook
2, Parallel side kick 8. Inverted hook
(ribs, stomach, badneys, ete,) E. SPIN BACK KICK
3. Upwatd side Kick 1. High spin back kick
Ac Angetibigeeidekick 2, Medium spin back kick
(right lead to left stance 8. Low spin back kick
and vice versa) 4. Step-back spin back kick (counter)
5. Angle-in low side kick i Leapinggepin back Kicks
6, Slide-in drop side kick 6. Vertical spin back kick
(upward or parallel thrust) 7. Spin back wheel kick (360°)
7. Step-back shin/knee side kick

(counter) F. HOOKING HEEL KICK
<aenaae (stiff-legged or bent)
. Reverse shin/knee stop-kick leg hiboking heel Kick
(GHG ot rear toot) 2, Medium hooking heel kick

e a 3. Low hooking heel kick
‘ou must deliver _ B. LEADING STRAIGHT KICK 4. Leading one-two hooking heel kick

2

ere somes = 8. Reverse one-two hooking heel kick
automatically. Cea ae connter te. 69) (with rear foot)

2. High straight kick

8, Medium straight kick G. KNEE THRUST

4. Low straight kick 1. Leading upward knee thrust

z 2. Leading inward knee thrust,

6. Rising straight kick 8. Reverse upward knee thrust
(to knee or wrist) (rear knee)

11, Step-back straight kick 4, Reverse inward knee thrust

8, Leaping straight kick (rear knee)

9, Downward front cross stomp HAND TECHNIQUES

C. REVERSE STRAIGHT KICK A. LEADING FINGER JAB

1. High reverse straight kick 1. Long-range finger jab

2, Medium reverse straight kick (high, medium, low)

8, Low reverse straight kick 2. Close-range finger jab

4, Angle-in reverse straight kick —the poke
(high, medium, low) 3. Corkscrew finger fan

5. Step-back reverse straight kick _p STRAIGHT LEADING

a barerse cross stort, PUNCH AND JAB

D.HOOK KICK 1. High straight lead

1. Leading hook (high, medium, low) 2. Medium straight lead (to body)
2, Reverse hook (high, medium, low) 3. Low straight lead
8. Leading one-two hook 4. Slanting right

"


--- PAGE 75 ---
5. Slanting left
6. Double straight lead

C. LEADING HOOK
1. High lead hook
2. Medium lead hook
3. Low lead hook
4, Tight
5. Loose
6. Upward (shovel)
7. Horizontal
8, Forward and downward
(corkscrew)
9. Palm hook

D.REAR CROSS
1. High rear cross
2. Medium rear cross
3. Low rear cross
4, Overhand downward stroke
(corkscrew hook or palm)
5. Upward groin strike

E, BACKFIST

1. High backfist

2, Medium backfist

‘3. Low backfist

4. Vertical backfist
(upward, downward)

5, Stiff-armed
(big backfist)

PF. QUARTER SWING (shortened are)
1. With palm
2. With back of fist
8. Reverse quarter swing (rear hand)
4. With finger fan
G.UPPERCUT
1. High uppercut
2. Medium uppercut
8. Low uppercut (bolo to groin)
4, Reverse ridge hand to groin
H. REVERSE SPIN BLOW
1. With bottomfist
2. With forearm

3. With elbow

4. Double spinning blow
I. HAMMER BLOW

1. Left hammer

2, Right hammer

3. Downward hammer

ELBOW TECHNIQUES
1. Upward elbow
2. Downward elbow
3. Twisting downward
4. Backward elbow
5, Smashing right
6. Smashing left
HEAD BUTT
1. Lunging forward
2. Lunging backward
3. Lunging right
4. Lunging left
ETc.
GRAPPLING
1. Wrestling: Strangulation (hair control)
Leg tackles
‘Tie-ups
2. Judo: Joint locks
Chokes
Leverage timing
MENTAL CULTIVATION
1. Krishnamurti
2. Zen
8. Taoism
CONDITIONING
1. General: Running
Flexibility
2. Specialized: Boxing
Kicking
Wrestling
8. Strength: Weights
Special apparatus
NUTRITION
1. Break down/build up
2. Muscular diet

TOOLS

It is the ability
to outsmart an
opponent and
out-maneuver
him that is the
skill and science
of the sport

of boxing.

8


--- PAGE 76 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

KICKING

x
A
A
fi

What are the Choices of Target in terms of easiness, safety, efficiency?
a) hook: (1) — R-stancer’s frontal knee
(2) Rstancer’s groin
(3) R-stancer’s head
(4) Lestancer’s knee

Choices of (5) L-stancer’s head
peace am [Note: investigate body feel to inflict force on unfamiliar but direct target
% perros areas on R and L-stancer. Remember L-rear hook.]

b) side: (1) R-stancer’s shin/knee
(2) L-stancer’s shin/knee
[Note: Close-range downward thrust (instep, shin, knee) — also cross
stomp.)
) reversehook: (1) _—_L-stancer's frontal knee
(2) Restancer’s knee
d) lead forward thrust: look into knee, groin
) L(rear) forward thrust
ft) Lspin kick
g) vertical hook kick
h)  R-finger jab — 3 ways
i) Rab — (3 ways and high/low)
i) R-hook — high/low
k) R-back fist — high/low
1) left cross — high/low
m) right bottom fist (forward hand)
n) _L (rear) bottom fist — (reverse, spin)
©) possible combinations of kicks
(1) natural follow-up
(2) trained follow-up
P) possible combinations of hands

76


--- PAGE 77 ---
TOOLS

A good offense
consists of leads,
false moves and
counterpunches
supported by
mobility, pres-
sure and gen-
eralship.

(ehh
Ce) Hebd hh ge
Ce) hak eos

”


--- PAGE 78 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

Ku
id
Af
ii

78

Savate's Purring Kick — (circular or upward force)
a) Knee does not have mobility like upper body.
+b) Thrown to the front and rear,
©) Quickest (economic), most powerful
(natural) and hardest to move away from,
d) Heel normally makes contact. Experiment
making contact with the ball of the foot.
¢) Sometimes it is necessary to bypass the
front to attack the rear weight-bearing leg.
‘The more weight on the leg,
the more damage to the knee,

Kicking technique must:
1) _ have a sense of powerful ease, developed through practice and
supplementary exercises,


--- PAGE 79 ---
2) be able to adjust height in initiation.
8) be economically sudden in initiation.

4) have smooth speed.

5) be able to blend with any movement.

6) be direct and instantaneous in relaying tool part to target area,
7) be accurate and precise

Functions of the longest kicks —
1) Primarily to reach a more distant target
2) Asa destructing tool
3) To bridge the gap for another kick or hand technique

The kick you use will vary according to the type of opponent you face.

‘The attacking lunge (step and slide and all the attacking steps) must:

1) facilitate a speedy recovery out of range of a counterkick, should the attack
fail. The slightest loss of balance or control may mean that some part of a
counterkick target has been left unprotected for a fraction of a second.

2) be able to overcome the long measure with speed, economy and control.

3) have an element of surprise, catching the opponent off guard mentally or
physically.

4) _ be driven with great determination and speed/power once initiated.

5) use maximum reach to kick the target (3/4 bend or more, especially in

attack). That extended distance is what makes an all kicking attack possible.

6) utilize intense grace and awareness, comparable to the hand, and explode
with killing power ~ that’s the art of kicking,

Develop power on the spot —
4) During combinations with the same leg.
— high/low hook and shin/knee side
— high/low and angle-in hook kick
b) During alternate leg kickin,
©) During reaching, extended reaching, hooking.
d) During close-range thrusting.
— Apply close-range side kick downward to avoid jamming and to add a
powerful tool.
— Consider kneeing in close-range and stomping while maintaining
balanced posture.

Develop “body feel” (distance, timing, releasing, etc.) of tossing your tool part at a
moving target while moving yourself, Learn to relay your weapon part while you are
in motion.

TOOLS

Western boxing
is too over-daring
because of re-
strictions on
illegal and “‘un-
fair” tactics.


--- PAGE 80 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

A
‘¥
Af
ii

Use the speedy
delivery of kicks
to “arrest” your

opponent's “mov-
ing away from
neutrality.”

20

ort
a) Heel — straight, side, cross Ka a
b) Ball — upward, straight, sides
2) Toe “WHE:
4) Instep

e) Both sides — sideswipe motions of hooking, ead 4
reaping, sweeping

x

Combine kicking with all phases of footwork.
a) Advance, all types
b) Retreat, all types
¢) Circling left, all types
4) Circling right, all types
e) Parallel moving

Notes on the speed kick — Like a cobra, the fast kick should be felt and not seen.

Use the speedy delivery of kicks to ‘‘jump” your opponent's consciousness. Find an
attitude of loosening antagonistic muscles priot to delivery, a “continuous waiting”
attitude rather than a “preparatory” one. Use the speedy delivery of kicks to “arrest”
your opponent's “moving away from neutrality.”

“Watch” the delivery, landing and recovery with continuous awareness, reinforcing all
with “watchful” hand guards,

Balancing center—

Initiation:
a) looseness in neutrality
b) economical start that blends with neutrality
c) playful looseness (mental)
and smooth speed (physical)

‘Transition:
a) clear sight
b) neutrality
c) regulated balance
a) tight defense


--- PAGE 81 ---
TOOLS

Landing:
a) well-timed collision with right part of tool
b) natural releasing of coordinated destructive force

Recovery:
a) flowing back to neutrality or flow on with attack
b) reinforcement with “watchfulness”

Which are the safety “speed” lead kicks used as pace setters, respect getters, distance
gougers? How much faster can you make them without turning them into “flickiness?”
Note: Use the boxing jab as a guideline. For instance, you wouldn't use the rear hook
unless you are pretty certain of securing distance and opponent’s condition. Learn how
not to let the opponent take advantage of your commitment. Psyche your opponent,
physically and mentally, by inflicting pain.

List kicks that snap from the knee such a:

groin hook kick (inward snap) Psyche your op-
reverse hook (outward snap) ponent, physical-
upward snap kick ly and mentally,
straight forward snap kick by inflicting pai

List kicks that thrust from the hips such
side thrust kick
back thrust kick
front thrust kick

Look into snapping a kick from the knee to get more power, ot snapping a kick from
the hip and knee to get more speed. Test both in long, medium (natural firing distance)
and close range.

What are the pacing kicks that are snappy and combine with quick retreat?
Note: They should slow the pursuer by hitting into his line of movement while you are
moving off his line of force.

What are the pacing kicks that jam?
Note: Work out precautions for being grabbed.

at


--- PAGE 82 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

BU

What are the close-range kicks that thrust and that snap?
Note: Work out natural hand or leg follow-ups.

ja Possible Angle Positions of Front Leg:

Learn “relaying
destructive force”
to “where” the
target is or

is headed.

82

Note: Learn “relaying destructive force” to “where” the target is or is headed. Use
“body feel” as your guideline.

Possible Angle Positions of Rear Leg: [

"

What are the strongest kicks in terms of destructive power?
What are those that can most easily score on the opponent?

KICKING METHODS
— Upward
— Downward
— Outside in
— Inside out
— Straight on


--- PAGE 83 ---
TOOLS

Examples with front leg kicks:
Instep Upward Groin Kick — (upward force)

(close-range/medium-range)
Note: Experiment on body feel to relay the
+ most destruction to opponent ’s:
i). (1). shin
(2) knee
(3) goin

2

et

Vertical Hook — (upward force)
(medium range)

ee Use “body feel”

— as your guideline.

Hook Kick — (outside in)

High — Medium — Low
Long — Medium — Close Range

LANDING ~ toe
instep
ball
shin

Watch leaning for balance and recovery. inside foot swipe



--- PAGE 84 ---
/ OOF JEET KUNE DO

A
Af
fi

Lear the most
efficient bridging
of distance, plus
efficient timing
with the oppo-
nent’s movement.

ry

Learn what muscles are involved in this kick and how to limber the parts.
Important: Relax timing muscles but keep an overall alertness of position and timing.

Look into using the ball of the foot for attacking the shin, knee or instep.

Reverse Hook Kick — (inside out) Ry)
)

Saas

Side Kick — (straight on, upward, downward, inside angle)
Range: long

medium

close (downward stomp)

In combat: The side kick is best utilized by directing

|

\ it downward.
iS Develop in the side kick a sense of “delicate ease.”
SHIN/KNEE KICKS
‘Metnods:
— Straight on

— Straightdown +
— _ Inside out (such as reverse hook kick)
— Outside in (such as hook kick)

Decide which shin/knee kicks are progressively longer:
— — shin/knee side
— _ shin/knee hook
—  shin/knee reverse hook
— straight on sbin/knee (front and rear)

All should be done with speed and sudden economy in mind, as well as with power.
Learn the most efficient bridging of distance, plus efficient timing with the opponent's
movement.


--- PAGE 85 ---
TOOLS

‘The Leading Shin/Knee Side Kick
‘This kick can be an explosive, crispy thrust or a pushing thrust to wrench the opponent's
knee while bridiging the gap for a leg or hand follow-up. It has a very demoralizing effect
and causes the opponent to attack less confidently. It also imposes respect of distance.

As an attack — to a right stancer

i matted ated mont 9 O) smate, prime
@ ‘ Cth mes Be SRR

‘The kick has a
very demoraliz-
ing effect and
si a df causes the op-
Cross Stomp — (downward force) tare ory
Front Leg: Rear Leg: less confidently.
GY "Ge %
i 2

(hip closing) (hip opening) Y D>

Name kicks that can be initiated without changing on-guard positioning before and/or
after, such as: hook kick, side kick, vertical hook and reverse hook.

* ALY, Front leg path without changing Rear leg path without changing
\ on-guard position too much. on-guard position too much.

(Note: The straight f) has many slight variations of path.)

3s


--- PAGE 86 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

Of these economy kicks, which, besides the hook kick, go for absolute speed?

2 Guard from flickiness — find a happy medium, however, with speed in mind. Work on
that particular initiation economy and not just on those kicks with non-changing, on-
guard movements. Instead, have that sudden economy be the guideline at the drop of

adime.

Powerful Kicks With Non-Commitment
Note: Use speedy delivery.

Hook Kick Example
a A\ a ~f 4

ave that sudden
economy bethe Small Phasic Bent Knee Economic Initiation _ Find the point for quick recovery to
guideline at the Position (neutral) neutrality. (This concerns all kicks.)
drop of a dime.

‘The Basic Kick Insertion (without footwork)

a) (2) ma (shift forward) SA
\
cS ee
a 2) Front Leg | Rear Leg

Learn how to cover initiation and the quick recovery to neutrality. Covering should be
automatic and continual.

Name kicks that involve the absolute changing of on-guard positioning before and/or
after initiation.

Study the leverage in still initiation.


--- PAGE 87 ---
‘TOOLS

Master kicking quickly and powerfully from high, low or ground posture. Develop body
fee] and efficient form in dropping suddenly to fast, powerful kicks while advancing,
retreating, circling left, circling right. Learn to use “energy flow” to rise from unaccus-
tomed squatting positions.

Upright —
frontal, sideways, circling

Crouch to Ground —
frontal, sideways, circling away

Sh,
*Ay
sn ete
frontal, sideways, circling Ky Ree BS, You must de-

Sa velop combina-
tions of punches
4 a } (and/or kicks) that

i a) work well.

Develop the ability to apply a sweep with the economy of a kick. Look into initiating

G sariet perso nitanttong me

the foot sweep, with or without hand work, as a counter or attack at long, medium and
close range.

87


--- PAGE 88 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

Practice foot sweep and take down: (a) from a fast initiation, (b) as part of a combina-
tion and (c) as a counterattack.

a er a

aN a
( Uw
—f A ai aA
gine
(¢) Rlvrens Lag Dickla, peasy Hark

weer ben bern fot ao,

Study kicking while a man is down:

Ku
h
K
fi

‘The leading on
straight punch is 7a jj 7 ;
the backbone of a S
all punching in —
Jeet Kune Do. o
ject Kune Do. plmpag
vy A
= &%
—-
u )
Rul on
whack STRIKING
LEADING STRAIGHT PUNCH

‘The leading straight punch is the backbone of all punching in Jeet Kune Do. It is used
both as an offensive and defensive weapon to “stop” and “intercept” an opponent’s
complex attack at a moment’s notice. When you are standing right foot forward, your
right punch and right leg become the main offensive weapons because of their advanced
position, With your right foot forward, your right hand is much closer to your oppo-
nent than your left. The reverse is true for the left foot forward stance. When fighting,
keep your strongest side up front.


--- PAGE 89 ---
TOOLS

‘The leading straight punch is the fastest of all punches. With the minimum movements
involved in delivery, balance is not disturbed and, because it goes straight toward the

(
cX ‘
\ of

target, it has a better chance of landing. (The opponent has less time to block.) Also,
the straight punch is more accurate than other punches.

No one punch, not even the efficient straight lead, can be an end in itself, though there
are styles that use nothing but straight line punching. The straight lead is used as a
means to an end and definitely should be reinforced and supported by other angle
pinches (and kicks), making your weapons more flexible without confinement to any
one line. After all, a good man should be able to strike from all angles and with either

hand (or leg) to take advantage of the moment.
‘The important
point is not to

‘The delivery of the straight punch is different from the traditional classical gung fu, aaa

First of all, the punch is never positioned on the hip, nor does it start from there. This Posture or
vay of delivery is unrealistic and exposes too great an area to protect. Of course, this preparatory

also adds unnecessary distance to travel toward the opponent. movements
prior to de-
livering the

In Jeet Kune Do, you never strike your opponent with your fist only; you strike him “7aigh spcirg 7
with your whole body. In other words, you should not hit with just arm power; the for that matter.
arms are there as a means to transmit great force with the correct timing of feet, waist,

shoulder and wrist motion at great speed.

Instead of coming from the shoulder, the punch is thrown from the center of the body
in the form of a vertical fist, thumb up, and straight toward the front of your own nose.
The nose here is the center guiding line, The wrist is slightly tuned downward before
delivery and is immediately straightened upon impact to add a corkscrew effect to the
opponent.

‘The important point is not to have any classical “get-set” posture or preparatory move-
ments prior to delivering the straight punch — or any punch for that matter. The lead-
ing straight punch is delivered from your ready stance without any added motions like
drawing your hand back to your hip or shoulder, pulling back your shoulder, etc. Prac-
tice your lead punch from the ready stance and finish again in the ready stance (not
back on the hip!). Later on, you should be able to strike from wherever the hand hap-
pens to be at the moment. Remember, punching in this manner will give you added



--- PAGE 90 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

speed (no wasted motions) and deception (no give-away movements preceding the
punch). [Use Zen illustration: Eat, but he is thinking; punch, but he is scared or
rushing. ‘Thus, a punch is not a punch.

Most guarding is done with the rear hand ~ thus, the term “guarding hand.” When
striking withthe lead hand, do not make the common mistake of the traditional, clas
cal way by putting your rear hand on your hip. The rear hand is there to supplement
‘your ead to make the attack a defensive offense. For example, when striking a body
blow with the lad hand, the guarding hand (the rear hand) should be held high to oft
any countering by your opponent to your upper body. In short, when one hand is out,
the other should be ether immobilizing one ofthe opponent's arms or withdrawing (nt
all the way to the hipt) for protection against countering and to secure a strategic pos!
tioa fora follow-up.

Relaxation is essential for faster and more powerful punching. Let your lead punch
shoot out loosely and easly; do not tighten up or clench your fist until the moment of
Jmpact. All punches should end with a snap several inches behind the target. ‘Thus, you
punch through the opponent instead of at him.

After shooting out the lead hand, do not drop it when withdrawing to the ready stance,
‘Though you might see this being done by @ good man because he is potentially fast and
‘00d at timing and distance, you should cultivate the habit of returning along the same
path and keeping that hand high for any possible counters.

‘When striking with the lead hand, it i advisable to constantly vary the position of your
‘head for added protection against the opponent's counter. During the first few inches
of advancing, the head remains in line; after that, the head should adapt. Also, to mini-
‘mize counters from the opponent, you should at times feint before leading. However,
{do not overdo the feinting or the headwork. Remember simplicity; just enough is
‘enough.

‘Sometimes it pays to use double lads because they are unexpected and the second
‘Punch tends to disturb the opponent's rhythm and thus, paves the way for a follow-up.

‘When advancing to attack, the lead foot should not land before the fist makes contact
‘or the body weight will end up on the floor instead of behind the punch. Remember to
take up power from the ground by pushing off with the rearfoot.



--- PAGE 91 ---
TOOLS

Your lead hand should be like greased lightning and must never be held rigidly or
motionless. Keep it slightly moving (without exaggeration) in a threatening manner, as

phn, anvnrne ples ons

it not only keeps your opponent on edge, but also can be delivered faster from motion
than from immobility. Like a cobra, your stroke should be felt before it is seen. ‘This is
particularly true of the leading finger jab.

Like a cobra, your

‘THE ELUSIVE LEAD stroke should be
felt before

Indelivering the lead, the position of the head should be constantly varied, sometimes 8€e”-

up, sometimes down, and sometimes “neither up nor down.” Sometimes, the rear hand

@ @)

Figa,, Fa #2)

‘an be placed in front of face while leading. (This might entail a loss of reach and
npidity.) Keep your opponent guessing — variety — variety!

o


--- PAGE 92 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

y

Py
oe
A

i

Straight hitting
(and straight kick-
ing) is the founda-
tion of scientific
fighting skill.

92

‘The Sudden Change
of Level

Use the first two
inches to lead, then
a sudden change—
head feint.

Use as defense for:
1. swings (hands

3, reverse heels

4. spin kicks and
blows.

Use to setup for

grappling and tack-



--- PAGE 93 ---
Necessary qualities of a straight lead:

1. Perfect balance of body.

2. Accuracy of aim.

8. Precise Liming and coordination,
. Maximum power of punch.

‘The straight lead is the blow that, whether used in attack or defense, leaves its exponent
in hitting range for a shorter period than any other.

Most experts make it their principle blow.

Some fighters are continually making the alternating movements of engaging, then

making an absence of touch (lowering or drifting the hand). This habit can be used to

advantage. As the adversary is leaving the blade and moving across to the opposite

line, the opportunity of making a straight thrust is present. Straight hitting
is based on an
understanding of

body structure
For an opponent who lacks decision, one who extends to lead but btings his hand back and the value

to the on-guard position, the straight thrust can follow advantageously. of leverage.

‘The above defensive errors, in conjunction with a slep forward by the opponent, render
the straight thrust all the more possible.

Straight hitting (and straight kicking) is the foundation of scientific fighting skill. It
developed late in history and, therefore, is the product of careful thought. Requiring
speed and intelligence lo use, it travels less distance than round arm blows (or hook and
spin kicks) and will reach the mark first. Straight blows (and kicks) are more accurate
than hooks and swings and allow full use of the arm (and leg) reach,

‘Straight hitting is based on an understanding of body structure and the value of leverage.
It is an attempt Lo use body weight in every blow, hitting with the body and using the
arms as merely the vehicles of force. Arm action alone is insufficient to give real power
to blows. Real power, quick, accurate, can be obtained only by shifting the weight in
such a manner that the hip and shoulder precede the arm to the center line of the body.

93



--- PAGE 94 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

<U
ih
a
hy

Power in hit-
ting comes from
a quick twist of
the waist, not a
swinging, sway-
ing movement.

oa

‘There are only two methods which obtain a complete shift of weight (compare this
with kicking):

1. A pivot or quick turn of the waist, allowing the hip and shoulder to precede
the arm.

2. A full body pivot, shifting the weight from one leg to the other.

‘The waist pivot is faster and easier to learn and is used as a basis for Leaching the art of
hitting.

Hitting does not mean pushing. ‘True hitting may be tikened to Lhe snap of a whip ~ all
the energy is slowly concentrated and then suddenly released with a tremendous out-
pouring of power. Pushing is exactly the opposite, with the concentrated force al the
start of the blow and a subsequent loss of power as the arm leaves the body. tn real
hitting, the fect are always directly under the body. In pushing, the body is often off-
balance as the force of the blow does not come from a pivot of the body but only from
a push off the rear foot.

Power in hitting comes from a quick twist of the waist, not a swinging, swaying move-
ment, but a pivot over the straight lead log. As long as this straight line is maintained,
as long as the hips are relaxed and free to swing, as long as the shoulders are not tensed
and are turned through to the center line of the body before the arms are extended,
power will result and hitting will be an art.

‘Once the straight line of the lead side of the body is broken, power is lost because Lhe
straight lead side of the body is the anchor, the pivot point, the hinge from which power
and force is generated to its greatest height. So greatis the power that may be attained
in this manner that a real artist can deliver a knockout blow without taking a single step
forward or displaying any apparent effort.

Pay particular attention to the development of relaxed tension. If you tighten up, you
lose the flexibility and timing which are so important to successful punches. Keep
relaxed at all times and remember that timing is your chief aid in making a blow
effective.

Punches are not supposed to be thrown with a wind-up motion, ‘They are made with a
well-directed forearm and loose shoulder muscles. Only when the punch begins to land
should the fist be clenched. The momentum helps carry the arm back to the proper
position.


--- PAGE 95 ---
TOOLS

The top of your shoulder is at the level of the point you are striking. Sometimes it is

all right to stand on the balls of your feet when landing a head shot on a tall person to
make your shoulder come to the level of his jaw. When hitting to the pit of the stomach,
both knees give way until the shoulder is at the level of the pit of the stomach.

Remember to take up power from the ground through your legs, waist and back. Sway
all your muscles into your punches (at the same time do your best to cut down motions)
and make them drive through. Push off from the ground.

When using a body pivot, tum on the balls of both feet while punching. The fist comes
straight from the center with the full power of one or the other leg bebind it. Some-
times a quick three or four-inch jump will do the trick.

According to your position and the time you have to put the right lead punch in, you

may occasionally take a short step to the left, just a few inches, with your left foot

{watch out for kicks). This will put even more weight into the punch, especially at

fairly long range. ‘Take up power
from the ground

through your legs,

‘Timing is best when the opponent rushes in. waist and back.

Remember, when advancing the foot must not land first or the body weight will rest
upon the floor instead of being behind the punch — heel slightly raised and pointing
outward.

Always have the legs slightly bent so that the strong thigh muscles come into play (like
a spring), especially before coming in.

Your step should be long enough to make your reach good and you should drive your
punch slightly through your target. Use your whole reach!

To ensure success, the straight hit and the lunge (step) must be one coordinated move.

‘Your head should sway slightly to the right as it moves forward with your step.

95


--- PAGE 96 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

H
he
Af
i

‘There are differ-
ent types of force
applications and
one should use
all of them.

96

Endeavor never to flinch or close your eyes, but watch your opponent intently all the
time. Keep your chin firmly set and nicely tucked away.

Remember the “covered line” (outside or in) and the supplementary guard, always there
corresponding to the uncovered line.

Always keep the rear hand guard up! Be ready to follow with the rear hand.

Follow-Through

First of all, there are different types of force applications and one should use all of
them.

Follow-through generally refers to continuation of a high rate of movement, or even an
acceleration from the instant of contact, until the ceasing of contact. The punch should
increase in speed throughout its run and when it lands, still have enough momentum and
power to drive clear through the object. Do not aim merely to strike at your man; aim
to drive through him — but do not have a “lean on” effect!

Make up your mind that you'll hit as hard as you possibly can with every ounce of your
bodily strength, with every fiber of your mental determination, and also that you'll keep
on hitting harder and harder as you progress through the object.

In boxing, for example, the athlete is taught to “strike through” the opponent — to
maintain or increase the rate of movement during the contact so that the “explosive
push” carries through farther and changes the opponent's position more sharply.

Wrist snaps at the last instant in striking acts are last moment accelerations that literally
go into the object (i.e.: compressed tennis ball). Instead of a relaxing follow-through,
the fighter must bring his hands back as fast as he thrusts them out. Reversing the waist
movement aids in last minute acceleration as well as return.

Lead to Body

A lead to the body is an effective blow used to bother the opponent and bring down
his guard (as the preceding feint of a high lead).


--- PAGE 97 ---
TOOLS

While not ordinarily a hard blow, it. can cause distress if driven to the solar plexus. Itis
important that the body follow Lhe arm, In other words, a blow to the body is more
effective and safer if the executioner sinks Lo the level of the target.

Drop the body forward from the waist to a position at right angles to the legs. Keep the
forward ieg only slightly bent but the rear leg more completely flexed. As the body
drops, drive the lead arm into forceful extension toward the opponent's solar plexus.
The blow is slightly upward, never downward. ‘The rear hand is carried high in front of
the body, ready for the opponent's leading hook. Hold the head down so that only the
top is visible and will be protected by the extended punching arm. The head should be
held tight against the extended arm.

To hit with a straight right lend to the body, feint with the left hand toward the head

by extending the left hand quickly with a slight forward movement. Step well in with

the loft foot (keeping it still in the rear), and at the same time lean over to the left side.

You will be practically clear of all danger. The right thai follows can become a punish-

ing hit and one difficult to deal with. Furthermore, you are ina position to bring up The whole secret

the left to the head with great force of the actual force
of a terrific punch
is its timing, co-

‘Training Aids ordinated, of
course, with
the accuracy

{tis most important, after recovering to a boxing position from any set maneuver of its aim.

(executed on count or “as you will”), to shuffle about a few seconds on the balls of
your feet for footwork drill and relaxation before repeating the set maneuver, This,
tactie deftly simulates actual fighting within the drill.

The whole secret of the actual force of a terrific punch is its timing, coordinated, of
course, with the accuracy of its aim. Hang a small ball to practice aim.

Practice shooting the lead out in a quick succession of blows, withdrawing the striking
arm just sufficient so as to enable full power to be put behind each blow.

Learn economical motion of delivery from a variety of angles, then lengthen the
distance gradually.

One important point: In all hand techniques, the hand moves first, preceding the foot.
Keep this in mind — hand before foot ~ always.

7


--- PAGE 98 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

nN
&
Af
fi

The lead jab
“feeler.” It
¢ basis of all
other blows, a
loose, easy
stinger.

98

Defenses for a Straight Lead

The following are examples of defenses against a straight lead while in a right stance:

# — Have the left hand ready in anticipation of a lead. It is already opened, held
a little higher than usual and weaves in controlled circles in front of your
body. Immediately, the lead hand of your opponent flickers on its way to
your face. Lean slightly to the left and strike firmly and quickly at his wrist
or forearm with your left hand —no strength whatever is required to deflect
the heaviest blow this way. Don’t fail to take advantage of the opening.
Put in a stiff lead to the face or body. Your opponent will be both off-guard
and off-balance.

# Sway to the left, stepping in with the right foot and deliver a severe body shot
with your right hand. (This may be varied by a punch to the face.)

# — Sway to the right, stepping in with the right foot and deliver a heavy left-
hand punch to the body (or head in a cross-counter).

# — Snap back, then forward with a retum.

One should always finish punching with his lead hand to enable him to return to the
correct fighting position instantly.

Vary the leads to the head and body.

LEAD JAB

‘The lead jab is a “feeler.”” It is the basis of all other blows, a loose, easy stinger. It isa
whip rather than a club. Ali’s theory is to picture hitting a fly with a swatter.

Its great advantage is that body balance is not disturbed and it is both an offensive and
defensive weapon. In offense, the lead jab serves to keep your opponent off-balance
‘and paves the way for mote severe punching. When used as a defensive blow, the jab
often stops ot effectively meets an attack. You can frequently slip in a sudden and dis-
concerting jab to the other fellow’s face at the very moment he is about to let go a real
punch at you. Used correctly, it is the sign of the scientific fighter, who uses strategy
rather than force. It requires skill and finesse as well as speed and deception (broken
rhythm). Keep in mind that there is nothing worse than a slow jab, except one which
is telegraphed.

It is important that, upon shooting your lead jab, you instantly return your fist to its
on-guard position, ready to punch again or to protect yourself from a counterpunch,


--- PAGE 99 ---
‘The jab is snapped across, not pushed, and should be brought back high and kept high
to offset a rear-hand counter. The arms merely relax and sink back to the body rather
than being pulled back. This is as important as knowing how to deliver.

At the time of landing the jab, the chin is tucked down and the shoulder is curved
around the chin as a protective covering.

In all hitting, including the lead jab, all force is outward from the body. The movement
of the lead jab should be a continuous winding motion from the shoulder.

It is often advisable to shoot more than one jab. ‘The second jab has an excellent chance
of landing (providing the first one was delivered with utmost economy) and it also serves
to cover up the missed first jab. Of course, you should shoot as many more as you wish

Continue to practice the jab until it is a light, easy, natural movement. Carry the shoul-
der and arm relaxed and ready at all times. It requires long, diligent practice to make
the movement automatic and to obtain speed and power without apparent effort.
Accuracy should be the main objective and the straighter you jab, the better.

If you cannot get at the opponent’s head or body, aim at his bicep.

‘The jab may also be effectively used with the fist closed to stiff-arm the opponent away
from you in defense.

He pork q Landy

| ee pets Sete eh e AA
{

pene aaa on 28
frctiee “pereaars fons pal ate
Pabst He ark mere tam sme Lepe get. 76,
(ick gt ts son euler chen if tatg
preety & fook msm debts pce want ny
Ae nag ae LE Coven te ga momen Jord acy
Oy cre Yon Ohad alec any
sia i

a
uh
t

Keep him on the defensive and increase the pace ever so steadily. Give him no rest.

TOOLS

Ina hitting,
including the lead
jab, all force is
outward from

the body,

99


--- PAGE 100 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

x
ih
i

The finger jab
is Western sword
fencing without,
a sword and the
primary target
is your oppo-
nent’s eyes.

100

LEADING FINGER JAB

Like a fencer’s sword that is always in line, the leading finger jab is a constant
your opponent. Basically, it is Western sword fencing without a sword and the
target is your opponent's eyes.

‘The leading finger jab is the longest of all hand weapons as well as the fastest be
the little force needed. You do not need power to jab at an opponent’s eyes.
the ability to seize an opportunity with accuracy and speed is the main thing in|
efficient use of the finger jab. Thus, as in all hand techniques, the finger jab
gin from your ready position without any added motions. It starts from your:
position and back again, like greased lightning. Like a cobra, your finger jab
felt and not seen.

‘You should be able to snap, not push, the finger jab out singly or in combination.
you are naturally fast, your opponent will many times be able to avoid one finger;
but you will usually catch him by instantly following the first with a second.
ing finger jab is one of the most efficient weapons, especially in self-defense, and
be cultivated to the highest form of proficiency.

Due to the fact that you use shocking flickering force rather than punching force,
leading finger jab also (with the point of view on jabbing) is like swatting a fly.
racy is what counts. Choose your target during movement and let go to recover
ready reinforcements.

‘Training Aids

Practice and sharpen your finger jab when you are fresh or you will begin to
gross motions for fine ones and generalized efforts for specific economical ones.
endurance exercises until after skill training.

1. “A” and “B” face each other in a ready position.

2, “A” advances with a low shin kick. ‘This is mainly used as a feint to
‘the opponent's composure and lengthen his reaction time. It also serves to
obstruct any possible kick during the advance.

3. As soon as the distance is bridged and slightly before “‘A’s’” lead foot is
alongside “B's” foot, A whips out his finger jab straight as an arrow to“
now opened guard. q

Reread the descriptions on the straight lead.


--- PAGE 101 ---
TOOLS

STRAIGHT REAR THRUST TO BODY

‘The straight rear thrust to the body is a power blow and used either as a counter or after
a preliminary feint with the leading hand. As in the leading jab to the body, the body
follows the blow (keep a good defensive position — watch out for a hammer blow
counter), although added force can be obtained by a body pivot to a position over the
lead foot. (Examine the difference between the two.) It is effective in pulling down

an opponent’s guard and can be used with great success against the tall fighter.

‘This blow should be used more fequently. When properly timed and correctly deliv-
cred, it is a most punishing blow and a comparatively safe one, since you crouch as you
drive the punch home, thus avoiding full-arm counters. Opportunities for the use of
this blow are rather frequent, since it is one of the best counters to the opponent's
opposite lead, which exposes one side of his hody.

‘The front hand is up and open, elbow down, guarding against the opponent’s rear hand.
‘The head is down along the punching arm and, thus, well-protected.
When properly

— timed and correct-

ly delivered, the
This blow should be frequently employed against an adversary who protects his face straight rear thrust
with the rear hand when “leading” to the head. to the body is a
most punishing
blow and a com-
paratively safe
one,

You have a foot of body to shoot at for each inch of chin. Also, the body is less
mobile.

Delivering a straight rear thrust to the body: Feint with your lead hand at the head and
“draw” your opponent's lead as a counter to your feint, or else, wait for him to lead.

Stopping a straight rear thrust to the body: Merely press your front arm across your
body. At the same time, raise your lead shoulder for fear the body blow turns into a
double hit — “loop hit.”

REAR CROSS

In your on-guard position, your rear fist is cocked somewhere under your chin, an inch
or two out from your chest. When you hit with your lead, the twist at your waist shifts
your tear fist from its regular on-guard position, back four or five inches to a point from
which you can, without telegraphing or drawing back, hit one of the hardest blows in.
boxing, the rear cross.



--- PAGE 102 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

A
he
ff
fi

‘The rear cross
is the heavy
artillery.

102

‘The rear cross is delivered in much the same manner as the lead jab in that it travels ina
perfectly straight line. The rear cross, however, is the heavy artillery and the twist at
your waist will be much greater.

In any power blow, the bone structure must be aligned so as to form one straight body
side or line which enables it to support the weight of the body, thus freeing the muscles
to propel the other side of the body forward and create terrific force. One side of the
body must always form a straight line.

It is important to make sure your rear heel and rear shoulder tum in one piece. ‘This is
accomplished by merely shifting the body weight over a straight lead leg, hinging the
Jead side of the body and freeing the opposite side for a forceful turn or explosive pivot.
It is the same idea as in slamming a door.

Your weight should begin on the ball of your rear foot. As your rear fist travels, it
twists and your rear shoulder moves into the blow. You twist at the waist and the
weight of your body is shifted forward into the punch and to your lead foot before
connecting. Your rear foot follows by dragging forward a few inches in the direction
of the punch and your lead fist shifts back as your body twists.

Remember, the secret of power in the straight rear cross (or thrust) is using the lead
side of the body as a hinge and allowing the rear side of the body to swing free.

Let the blow slip out loose and easy, don’t grip, don’t tighten up the arm at the begin
ning of the punch — let the contraction of the muscles come just as the blow lands, with
a last closing and tightening on the fist, a final burst of nervous energy to drive through
the opponent. Its force depends on speed (and more speed) and timing with the oppo-
nent’s movements. Do not forget the drive from the rear leg.

Keep your hands well up at all times; especially don’t drop the rear hand while punching
with the lead. Blows should start where the hands are. The start is normally made from
the on-guard position with no preliminary movement, no lifting or drawing back. The
shoulder curves over the chin for protection and the chin is down. The rear hand must
be shot from its “resting place” on the chest or body; it generally starts from near the
rear shoulder.

‘As the rear arm is extended, the lead arm is held close to the side in the position of
guard. This is done not only for an expected counter, but also so the boxer will be in
position to throw the second follow-up punch. Remember, one hand out, one hand


--- PAGE 103 ---
TOOLS

back. This movement must be practiced until it can be easily, quickly and correctly
performed. The arm should drive out with such snapping force as would seem to pull
it clear of the socket. Again, the blow must be driven through, not just at, an object.
‘The arm then relaxes back to the on-guard position.

When using the rear cross, you must not hesitate. If you think you have the opening,
you should|et it fly and not be half-hearted about it.

Because the rear cross is a long-range blow, to be effective it must be delivered straight
as an arrow, fast as a shot and completely without warning. The most important part
of the rear cross is to cultivate a delivery speed so, when you strike, the damage is done
before your opponent realizes it. You must also be accurate with the straight rear cross
— far more accurate than your lead — and the straighter you keep the cross, the more
accurate and the more explosive it will be.

‘Unless you have correct balance, you will not be in a position to deliver a lead shot after

your rear cross. This is most important, because if your opponent ducks to avoid the

rear cross, your quickest method of recovery is to throw a lead and you must be in a If you think you
correct position to do so. If you are trying to correct faulty footwork in those split shave the opening,

ids, ‘well find If flat yur back. you should let fly
seconds, you may yourself flat on your es senia vee

hearted about it

‘The rear cross is difficult to use because the rear hand has farther to travel and use of
the rear hand will present an opening for your opponent if you miss. Practice minimiz-
ing the above two points and, thus, perfect the rear cross — non-telegraphic starting,
quick recovery.

Ina Right Stance

Usually, you will hit with your left fist after first having shot a right (one-two).

Keep the right hand moving; don’t hold it motionless. Let it flicker in and out like the
tongue of a snake ready to strike. Above all, always threaten and worry your

adversary.

‘Throw the right out, stepping out with the right foot simultaneously. Before it reaches
its mark (blocking the sight of the opponent), drive your left fist straight out (without
pulling it back even a fraction) and twist your body to the right, pivoting on the sole of
your left foot. As you pivot, get plenty of push and snap from the left side of your

103


--- PAGE 104 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

Ze
be
Af
hs

Power is
accentuated by
the coordination
of the whole body
in the follow-

through.

10a

body, up from the foot, through the legs and hips, and make sure it is capped off by
plenty of snap from your left shoulder. ‘This power is accentuated by the coordination
of the whole body in the follow-through. Keep balanced at all times.

It should be noted that the left (or rear) thrust is often a counterblow. Sometimes it is
better to feint the opponent into leading to shoot. the left asa counter, Here the blow
is delivered perfectly straight during the opponent’s lead at your face. You step inside

a right lead, allowing it to slip over your left shoulder, and shoot the left, meanwhile
keeping an eye on his left or putting a stop to it with your right. Your head must be
ducked forward and to the right, to avoid the opponent’s right lead (keep your eyes on
him!), but the duck must be very slight, just sufficient to avoid being hit. ‘The left hand,
back uppermost, should just skim the opponent’s elbow before his lead is straightened
and the swing of the body on the hips, from left to right, should be assisted by jerking
back the right elbow and shoulder.

It generally meets your man coming in and lands on the angle of the jaw. Do not always
hit at the head, however. Aim toward the center line to drive through the opponent,

‘Try a left to the stomach, then left cross.
‘Try two right leads to time your left straight.

Sometimes, move over a little further to the right and shoot the straight left inside his
arm in a slight upward direction.

When returning, keep your Jead shoulder raised for a right stancer’s left cross or a left
stancer’s lead hook.

In-fighting — Short Man Versus Tall Man

Keep your hands up, elbows close to your body. Bob and weave, moving from side to
side. Gauge your opponent's leads — make him miss and get inside his punches by

ducking, slipping, feinting or “sticking” with controlling hands. A short, straight left,
rather than a hard, telegraphed one will do the trick. ‘The opportunity is usually there
but only for an instant — hence, the short, fast left, rather than the looping, hard left.


--- PAGE 105 ---
TOOLS

Capitalize on a hodker who either drops the look upon delivery or Uhrows it in too wide

. Capitalize on a
anarc, You should shoot over a hard straight left as soon as his right shoulder is bookaeetitaler
lowered or the wide arc begins. cop Danogks

upon delivery
or throws it in
‘The overhand left is used by small fellows against taller men. Tt travels cular too wide.an are.

ol aa {

“over” motion into the vicinity of the opposition’s head. The movement must come
| from the shoulder. Vary it with an inward palm stroke


--- PAGE 106 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

A
A
f
fi

Always try

to nail a medium-
range target (body
or head) with
stepping straight
punches.

106

Always try to nail a medium-range target (body or head) with stepping straight punches.
However, if your opponent is blocking, evading or countering those straight blows, you
can resort to medium-range hooking attempts.

‘THE HOOK

‘The hook is more effective as a counterblow. It is never a wide, looping blow, but is.
more like a loose, easy, snappy punch. Remember, the pivot is the key; footwork
makes the punch.

Avoid telegraphing! Start and end in the ready position. Jt must begin from the on-
guard position for proper deception. The hand is never pulled back or lowered. Always
jab or feint first to get your distance and leverage.

When using a lead hook, always keep your rear hand high as a shicld for your face.
‘Your rear elbow protects your ribs on that side.

‘The hook is mastered chiefly on the small punching bag. ‘Try lo explode sharply with
‘out twisting the body out of shape and be ready to follow-up with more punches.

LEAD HOOK

‘The more versatile the fighter — the more alert mentally and the more agile physically —
the more apt he is to shove the most unorthodox blows from the most impossible
angles.

‘The lead hook should be used judiciously. [t is most effective when going in or coming
out and is useful against an over-reaching straight or against swings.

With the opponent in the same stance, the lead hook is often delivered when he has
lowered his rear hand guard or after he has executed a lead jab.

Against a clever defensive fighter, the lead hook is sometimes the only way you can
penetrate his defense or force him to vary it so that you can find openings for other
types of punches.

‘The lead hook can be used as a lead when, for some reason, your opponent has lost his


--- PAGE 107 ---
ability to move out of the way. It is more effective as a counterblow or as a follow-up,
however, because it is basically a short-range weapon — when the opponent is coming
to you. Try a straight lead or some other preparation first. A good way to use the lead
hook powerfully is to fake a rear cross. Always vary your punches: high/low or low/
high, singly or in combination. Jabbing and feinting (with advance) is a good means of
getting your distance.

‘The lead hook is also a good punch while in-fighting — it comes from the side, outside
the range of vision, as it were, and will go around the guard. This is valuable when
close in, especially after the opponent is shaken up by a straight blow.

‘The body is the easier target for the simple reason it covers a far larger surface than the
jaw and is less mobile. The groin might be a better target, too, and is definitely harder
to block than the jaw.

Ahook to the body is more effective close in. Feint to his head, then, in a flash, step

forward with the lead foot and sink your lead hook into his stomach, ribs, groin or ‘The body is the

whichever target is closer. At the same time, duck to the opposite side from which your _ easier target for

hook is being thrown. In doing this, you must bend your lead knee, bringing your the simple reason

shoulder as near as possible, level with the striking point. To preserve balance, turn it povets as
larger si

the toe of the rear foot well out. Keep your rear guard up. ‘pal

is less mobile,

The Ho.

The hook is a good punch to combine with a sidestep, for you are moving sideways and
it is the natural way to swing at that moment. Similarly, you may land effectively on
your opponent with a hook at the instant he is trying to sidestep. Remember, if you
catch your man coming in, the blow will be twice as hard. Remember, also, to keep
‘your rear hand up while striking!

107


--- PAGE 108 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

RY

According to Mills, there are at least two ways to deliver a lead hook.

# The long lead hook: Stab your opponent’s face with a straight lead and
quickly follow with the hook. (Study the weight shift in attacking and
countering ~reaching forward and shifting to the back leg.)

# — The short lead hook: This is delivered from the on-guard position with the
elbow closer to your side. (As you counter, shift your weight from the lead
to the rear.)

Like all punches, the lead hook must begin from the on-guard position for added
deception.

Always jab or feint first to get distance. For example, feint a cross to prepare leverage
but don’t throw it too far. Most boxers pull their hand back too far before throwing
the hook. Try not to pulll or lower the hand. Enough power can be put into the punch
without pulling the arm far back. Much of the “kick” behind the lead hook is accom-
plished by the footwork.

The lead heel must be raised outward so that the body can pivot, and the waist and
shoulders reverse when the blow lands.

You should keep the lead shoulder high for full leverage when you hook to the side of
the chin.

Remember that punches are not supposed to be thrown with a wind-up motion. They
are made with a well-directed forearm and loose shoulder muscles. The momentum
helps carry the arm back to the proper position.

Frequently, a boxer tries to put too much body behind the punch, thereby making it a
push punch. ‘The hook is a loose, arm-propelled punch. ‘The “kick” comes from the
looseness of the delivery and the proper pivoting of the feet and body. The weight of
the body is shifted with the hook to the side opposite the side you hook from. If you
ead a hook, you must step in with the punch to make your reach good. Use a loose,
easy, snappy punch; never a wide and looping blow.

In loose hooking, the whip of the arm is caused by turning the body away from the
arm until the range of movement in the shoulder joint is completely used. Then, the


--- PAGE 109 ---
TOOLS

arm must turn with the body. Executed quickly, this causes the arm to whip forward
as if released from a bow. Make the blow snappy; always think of speed and more
speed. Aim to drive through the opponent.

Your lead heel is raised outward, swiveling on the ball of your lead foot so that your
blow will have a better reach and will go through better and faster. Drop a little to the
opposite side to get more weight and to safeguard yourself.

Above all, minimize all motion so that you will be moving just enough to have the
maximum effect without hooking wildly.

‘The more you “open” an outside hook, the more it degenerates into a swing. You
must keep it tight. Also, when you open a hook, you open your own defense.

all, mini-

‘The great difficulty is in learning to swing sharply without twisting the body out of — eile

shape. so that you will
be moving just

enough to have

‘The more sharply the elbow is bent, the tighter and more explosive the hook. Experi- oo ory

ment with the arm slightly rigid prior to landing.

There are no wrists in boxing. (Experiment with that statement.) ‘The forearm and the
fist should be used as one solid piece, like a club with a knot on the end of it. The fist
should be kept on a straight line with the forearm and there should be no bending of
the wrist in any direction, Be careful not to hit with your thumb.

At the finish of the punch, the thumb is up. There is no twist of the fist — for proper
protection of the hand. The forearm is rigid from the elbow to the knuckles and does
not bend at the wrist. Remember always that your knuckles are pointing in the exact
direction of your whirling weight.

Always keep the rear hand high as a shield for the other side of your face. The rear
elbow protects the ribs. Make both points a habit!

Be ready to follow-up with another solid punch with either hand.

109


--- PAGE 110 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

‘The hook is
mastered chiefly
on the small

‘speed bag.

110

When blocking a hook, the tendency is to pull away or out from the blow. This is abso-
lutely the wrong thing to do. Move in, not out, so that the hook ends harmlessly around
your neck.

‘The hook is mastered chiefly on the small speed bag; try to explode sharply without
twisting your body out of shape. Be sure your fists feel comfortable.

REAR HOOK

‘The rear hook is valuable for in-fighting, especially when coming away on the break or
when the opponent is backing away. Sometimes, you can take your opponent's atten-
tion off the lead hook by showing him your rear punch.

‘Study a left rear hook to the kidney of a crouching opposition, an opponent who turns
constantly in a right stance to the left, leaving his right kidney an open target. The fist
is looped in a half-circle into the kidney.

SHOVEL HOOK

Shovel hooks are thrown “inside” with the elbows in, pressing tightly against the hips
for body blows and pressing tightly against the lower ribs for head blows. They are
thrown from your on-guard position and they are short-range dandies. Make certain
you have no tension in the elbow, shoulder or legs until the whirl is started. Your hip
comes up in a vigorous shoveling hunch and your hand is at a 45-degree angle. The
punch is angled to shoot inside an opponent's defense.

Execution (right stance): Pull your right elbow in and press it firmly against the front
edge of your hip bone. Turn your half-opened right hand up slightly so that your palm
is partially facing the ceiling. Your palm should slant at an angle of about 45 degrees
with the floor and ceiling. Meanwhile, keep your left guard in normal position. Now,
without moving your feet, suddenly whirl your body to your left in such fashion that
your right hip comes up with a circling, shoveling hunch that sends your exploding
right fist solidly into the target about solar plexus high. ‘The slanting angle of your
right hand permits you to land solidly with your striking knuckles. Make certain you
have no tension in your elbow, shoulder or legs until the whirl is started from your
normal position. More important, make certain that your hand is at the 45-degree
angle and your hip comes up in a vigorous shoveling hunch.

‘The fist angle and the hip hunch are important features of all shovel hooks, whether


--- PAGE 111 ---
to the body or head. The leg spring used in the hip hunch speeds up your body whirl
and, at the same time, deflects the direction of the whit slightly upward in a surge.
Meanwhile, the combination of the angled fist and the bent elbow points your striking
knuckles in the same direction as that of the whirling surge. You have a pure punch.
Your fist lands with a solid smash that packs plenty of follow-through. And your pure
punch is angled to shoot inside an opponent’s defenses.

Shovels to the head are delivered from the on-guard position. (Better practice it on the
speed bag.) Fold your right arm in toward your body, keeping your forearm straight

up until your thumb knuckle is only a slight distance from your right shoulder. Be sure
that your right elbow is well in and that it is pressing against your lower right ribs. Now,
without moving your feet, suddenly give your body the combination shoulder whirl and
hip hunch and let your angled right fist explode the punch against your chin-high target.
Make certain each time that your elbow is pressing against your lower ribs at the start of
the whirl and that your fist, when it lands, is only a short distance from your right
shoulder.

Shovel hooks are full-fledged inside lead hooks, one of the shortest, yet one of the most
explosive blows. Once you have mastered it, your hands will flash instinctively to their
shovel post as your body starts its hunching whirl. Your body will pick them up.

You can make the range with any number of attack combinations in which the shovels
are used for follow shots. The simplest combinations would be a long right jolt to the
head (from a right stance), which failed to knock your opponent backward, followed
immediately by a left shovel to the head or body. Or, you could follow a similar straight
right to the head with a right shovel to the head or body. Likewise, a long straight left
to the head, which failed to accomplish its explosive object, would put you in position
for right shovels to either target. Also, if a fast opponent steps into you, his speed may
be such that you can’t catch him with a stepping counterpunch, but that very speed
may make him a perfect “clay pigeon” for your short-range artillery. In addition, you’ll
be in short range for counter-shovels many times when you ward off attacks by means
of blocks, parries, slips and the like.

‘The shovel ranks next to your long, straight punches (according to Dempsey). They
enable you to knock out or at least soften up an opponent. who is trying to clinch with
you. (Don’t forget to use elbows, stomps, knees.) They help you to keep inside the
attack of bobbing weavers, most of whom hook from the outside, and help you
straighten them up. Since the shovels are all short, tight blows, you are less likely to _
get hit while using them than while throwing the more open outside hook.

TOOLS

Your pure punch
is angled to shoot
inside an oppo-
nent’s defenses.

ut


--- PAGE 112 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

A
be
£

‘The essence

of any hook is,
that the striker
raises his elbow

at the last possible
‘moment when
swinging.

412

CORKSCREW HOOK

Strictly speaking, a corkscrew hook is delivered almost like a straight punch with the
difference that, just before contact, the wrist is turned sharply. It is a curved, tearing,
knuckle jab for medium range.

‘The essence of any hook is that the striker raises his elbow at the last possible moment
when swinging. This will bring his knuckles around so they will make contact when his
punch lands.

Execution (right stance); From your on-guard position, start your shoulder whirl as if
you were going to shoot a medium-range right jab — no preparatory movement. Instead
of jabbing, however, snap your right forearm and fist down, and your right elbow up.
Your right fist snaps down with a screwing motion that causes your striking knuckles to
land properly on the target. When your fist explodes against the target, your forearm is
almost parallel to the floor.

When you step in with the right corkscrew, you move in with a “pivot step” — stepping
forward and slightly to your own right, pointing the toe sharply in. Your body pivots
on the ball of your right foot as your right arm and fist snap down to the target. At the
instant of the fist’s landing, your rear left foot generally is in the air, but it settles
immediately behind you.

If you have a potent right corkscrew that flashes in without warning, your opponent
will be very cautious about menacing you with his rear left fist. You can use the cork-
screw hook to beat an adversary’s rear cross. Moreover, if he permits his guarding left
hand to creep too far forward as he blocks or parries your leading right jab, your cork-
screw hook can snap down behind that guarding left and nail his jaw.

‘The right corkscrew is often delivered while you are circling to your opponent's left.

Practice on the light speed bag to obtain proper form and zip.


--- PAGE 113 ---
TOOLS

PALM HOOK

‘The palm hook is simply a fast, open hand hook that hits with the palm of the hand,

In the normal punching position, the right outside palm hook is very useful as a lead
that shoots in behind the opponent's guarding rear hand. And, it is useful as a counter
that, with guarding or slipping, beats a straight lead to the punch.

UPPERCUT
Lead and rear hand uppercuts are used freely in close-quarter work. There are many
opportunities for the punch once you get the inside position.

Uppercuts can be used for head down charges and wild swinging blows, This presupposes
that you do not go in with your head down or body bent forward until you have thor-

oughly sized up your opponent’s style or you will run into an uppercut. ‘The uppercut
becomes almost
useless against a
" “eis fast boxer who
‘The short uppercut is an effective one. Keep your legs bent before striking; straighten aneon

them suddenly as you send the punch in. Get up on your toes and lean back a little as alt the time and
the blow lands, dropping more weight on the left leg when using the rightand more on _ simply jabs a long
the right leg when using the left. ead in your face.

Against a right stancer, when uppercutting with the lead right hand, lay your left hand
for a moment on your opponent’s right shoulder to make sure you don’t run into a
heavy return.

Rear hand uppercut (right stance): Draw a right lead, then step in with a quick head
twist to the right. As he’s still leaning forward in his lead, deliver a short, sharp, left
uppercut to his chin, raising and obstructing his right with your punching arm.

‘The left rear uppercut is delivered by lowering the left on the way across and “scooping”

up and to the jaw or groin. The lead hand is drawn back for protection as well as
strategic offensive position.

‘The uppercut becomes almost useless against a fast boxer who stands upright all the
time and simply jabs a long lead in your face. You must then plan to get to close-

413


--- PAGE 114 ---
_/ TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

4

4y
be
Af
fi

Hit as straight

as possible. Don’t
telegraph any
punch,

quarters and apply this punch to his groin, etc. By these methods, you may then tire
him so much that he will drop his head.

‘The blow may be practiced upon a hanging bag of Indian com.

a) Upward hook: You screw the blow up and in so that you can send it to the chin ofa
man who covers his face by holding his arm across it. Use a violent turn of the hip.
(Note descriptions of the corkscrew hook.)

b) Horizontal hook — Forward hook: Both go over or around the man’s guard. It's
almost a bent-arm jab. Drive through with the body.

(Note descriptions of the shovel hook.)

GRY
ial

COMBINATION PUNCHING

A good Western boxer hils from every angle. Each punch sets him in position to deliver
another punch. He is always on center, never off-balance. ‘The more effective combina-
tions a fighter has, the more different types of opponents he will be able to defeat.

Some observations are applicable to all types of hitting. Hit as siraight as possible. Step
in when you punch and make your reach good. Don’t telegraph any punch. If you have
to set your fist in a certain way for a particular punch, do it ina manner that won't


--- PAGE 115 ---
TOOLS

warn your opponent. Fight from a center and always be in position and balanced to
shoot any punch, Don’t overshoot your target. After hitting, instantly get back on
guard. End a series of punches with your lead hand.

For long-range fighting, jab with your lead and cross with your rear. For short-range
fighting use hooks, rear hand body blows and uppercuts.

Sway a little as you hit. A hard punch must be delivered from a solid base; light punches
are delivered by a boxer on his toes.
Learn to hold
your fire until
Learn to hold your fire until you can hit your opponent. Back him to the ropes or cor- You can hit your
ner him before you attack. Don’t waste your energy missing. If he does the leading, oo
avoid his punches and hit back with solid counterpunches before he can get away.

Keep loose and relaxed except when actually fighting. Develop speed, timing and judg-
ment of distance by many hard workouts with all types of sparting partners. With this,
practice your authority; hit confidently and hard.

GRAPPLING

Throwing /
1. Hooking throw rat
2. Reverse hooking throw |
3. Single leg tackle and trip Nef
4. Double leg tackle
5. Right foot sweep — with or without arm drag to right or left stance
6. Left foot sweep — with or without arm drag to right or left stance
7. Kick back

1s


--- PAGE 116 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

oy
fU Joint Locks
3b Joint locks may be done while standing or lying on the ground, as an immobilizing
technique.
AU 2. Wrist lock
3. Reverse wrist lock
4. Reverse twisting wrist lock — to double arm lock
5. Lying across arm bar
6. Standing single leg lock
. 71. Lying single leg lock
8. Single leg and spine lock
9. Double leg and spine lock
10. Foot twist Loe hold
Chokes

1. Rear drop choke
2. Lean over drop choke
3. Side drop choke

Gauge your

opponent's leads Foul Tactics

— make him miss 1. Haiy pulling while in-fighting for controt

and get inside his 2. Foot stomp while in-fighting . Le for maiming

punches by duck- oF ‘ j :
ing, slipping, feint- 3. Skin pinching, biting and ear pulling for release or control

ing or “sticking” 4. Groin grabbing for maiming or release

with control
linghands. Takedown Methods

1. Circle step single leg tackle
2. Drop step Jeg tackle
3. Draw step leg tackle

a) & EY . 4%

“y —
Do's Don'ts

1. Always keep moving. 1. Don't cross your legs

2. Be prepared for counters. 2. Don't commit your arms too deeply.

3. Develop cat-like movements. 3. Don’t chase your opponcnt

4. Make the opponent wrestle your 4. Don’t rely on one takedown; be
way. ready for other openings.

5. Be aggeessive; make your opponent 5. Don't let your opponent circle you.

think defense.

6


--- PAGE 117 ---
‘TOOLS

p-— DOUBLE LEG ATTACKS
LEG ATTACKS ;— 4) Ke haets My aleaed,
re eae bY). Phe tery, n
4) He Gentle keg alloc | @) je tach Kirk by
A) he aa haak +t) ma Lye
“tary! scm ie
¥ Re
“i At hs
Cte NATE
r— DOUBLE LEG LOCKS SINGLE LEG ATTACKS
¢) Ley 4y vaklack
) YH cewek Life faim ha
«) / i
A, Ye $s.
c) 2 Fe fern top Aijaticpulete,
By (\ :
: Se oe
Bvt ty bet os 3s
y
3) A emack OU gran phe

a7


--- PAGE 118 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

A

he
‘l
4

‘The elements

of attack are

all used to carry
the attack through
strategy, requiring

18

[-— SINGLE LEG LOCKS



--- PAGE 119 ---
Trew —

a WRIST PASS

—>

yw <> PE ret

OmseA, 1

[-— TOUCH (JAB) and GO



--- PAGE 120 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

HEAD and NECK MANIPULATIONS

Fen? Face lex

vantage of the
‘openings created.

120


--- PAGE 121 ---
‘TOOLS

HEAD and NECK MANIPULATIONS.

A. LG.



--- PAGE 122 ---


--- PAGE 123 ---


--- PAGE 124 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

ao RD

PREPARATIONS

Intelligence is sometimes defined as the capacity of the
individual to adjust himself successfully to his environment—
or to adjust the environment to his needs.


--- PAGE 125 ---
PREPARATIONS

FEINTS

To minimize the danger of being heavily countered, leads should almost always be pre-
ceded by a feint of some sort.

slight wave of the hand, a stamp of the foot, a sudden shout, etc., can produce sen-
sory irradiations sufficient to reduce coordination. This mechanism is at the reflex
level of human behavior and even many years of athletic experience cannot erase the
distracting effects of extraneous stimuli.

No feint can be counted effective, however, unless it forces the opponent to move. To
be successful, it must appear to be a simple movement of attack.

Good feints are decisive, expressive and threatening, and one can say that JKD is built
on feints and the actions connected with them.

‘The feint is a deceiving thrust which invites and lures the opponent to make the appro-
riate parry. As the opponent takes the parry, the fighter's hand disengages from the
opponent’s parrying hand and the thrust is completed in the opened line with either
hand. The feint is composed of a false thrust and a real, evasive thrust.

‘The false thrust is a half-extended arm with a slight forward movement of the upper
body. The real, evasive thrust is done with a lunge. The false thrust must appear so real
that it will threaten the opponent into a reaction, The false thrust must appear to be a
real thrust in order to convince the opponent to take the parry.

Feints should be made with the arm more extended (fast! but impress!) if they precede
kicking and long-range advancement. If they are roade after a purry and the adversary
can be reached without a lunge, keep the arm slightly bent and stay well-covered with
shifting or a rear guard.

‘The advantage of a feint or feints is that the attacker can start lunging with his feints
and, thus, be gaining distance from the outset. He will have shortened the distance to
travel by a good half with his foint and left to his second movement only the second
half of the disengagement. He gains distance by starting his lunge with his feint and,
simultaneously, gains time by deceiving the parry (the opponent's reaction) on the way
to his target.

A slight wave of
the hand, a stamp
of the foot, a sud-
den shout...

126


--- PAGE 126 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

Feinting is an essential part of attack. The more the opponent can be caught off-guard,
or more important still, off-balance by means of feints, the better.

BU

ia @ a am
If 3

fi

‘The speed of your feint is dependent upon the reaction of your opponent. Thus feinting,
The feintisa _like speed and distance, must be regulated to your opponent’s reaction.

deceiving thrust
which invites

and lures . ..
‘The one-two feints can be utilized laterally (inside/outside; outside/inside) or vertically
(high/low; low/high), with only one hand or with the two combined.

‘The first movement, the feint, must be long and deep, or penetrating, to draw the
parry. The second movement, the hit, must be fast and decisive in its deception of the
parry, allowing the defender no possibility of recovery. Thus, the feint rhythm is long-
short.

Even in the delivery of compound attacks with two feints, the depth of the first feint
must force the opponent to move to the defense, But, as at this stage the measure has
been considerably shortened, the second feint cannot also be long. There is no room,
and no time to do so. Thus, the rhythm or cadence of a two-feint compound attack

will be: long-short-short.

A more advanced form of feinting with a change of cadence could be described as:
short-long-short, The object of this variation would be to mislead the adversary, making
him believe that the second feint (Jong) was the final action of a compound attack, thus

drawing the parry.

126


--- PAGE 127 ---
By “ong” we do not really mean slow. While penetrating deeply toward the opponent,
the feint must be fast. The combination of speed and penetration are the factors which
draw the desired reaction from the defense.

PREPARATIONS

Itan opponent doesn’t react to feints, an attack with straight or simple movements is
advisable,

By making several real, economical, simple attacks first, the feints will be more effec-
tive. The opponent will not know whether a simple attack or a feint followed by a de-
ception is being executed. This is especially effective against the less mobile opponent
to promote a reaction. The same tactic might excite the speed-footed opponent into

flight.

Feints can also be made in the order of false attacks to parry the opponent's counter-
attack and riposte or make a fast return or counter-retum.

Object of the feint:
1. To open the line in which one intends to attack.
2. To make the opponent hesitate while immediately closing the distance.
3. To deceive the parry which the feint provokes — to trap and hit or to delay

the attack and hit as the opponent moves back to recover.

Introduction of the feint:

1
2,
3.
4.
6.
6.
4.
8.

As a direct thrust

As an evasive thrust

‘As an engagement

As a disengagement

As pressure

Asa violent pressure

As abeat

As a cut-over (for immobilization)

Parries to evade:

L

fi:
3.

Simple
Circular
Counter or changing

‘The number of parries to evade can be single, dual or plural.

‘The speed of your
feint is dependent
upon the reaction
of your opponent.

127


--- PAGE 128 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

#U
he
ci
fi

‘The depth of

the first. feint
must force the
‘opponent to move
to the defense.

128

Execution

Assume the on-guard position. Advance slowly. While advancing, give a quick bend of
the forward knee, This gives the impression that the arms are moving as well as legs.
In reality, the arms are held relaxed and ready as though committing the lead hand for
the opponent.

‘Make a slight forward movement of the upper body, bending the forward knee and
moving the lead hand slightly forward. While advancing, take a longer step forward with
the lead foot, as in the quick advance, and jab the lead arm into extension without
hitting the opponent. (Be extra sensitive to counters while advancing—be economical.)
From this close position, fold the lead arm back to the body and jab to the chin,

Another effective feint is a short bend of the body above the rear hip while moving
forward.

‘The step-in/step-out feint means stepping forward one step as if to jab with the lead
hand, but instead, stepping out of range by pivoting off to the outside with the lead
leg. Now, step in as if to feint but drive a lead jab to the chin. Step out immediately.
Continue, one time feinting, the next time actually jabbing with the lead hand. If pos-
sible, follow the lead jab with a straight rear thrust to the chin (one-two).

Other feints:

1. Feint a lead jab to the face and jab to the stomach.
2. Feint,a lead jab to the stomach and jab to the face.

3. Feint ajab to the face, feint a rear thrust to the face and then jab the lead
to the chin.

4. Feint a straight rear thrust to the jaw and hook the lead to the body.

5. Feint a lead jab to the chin and deliver a rear uppercut to the body.

Note: Compare all the above for kicking feints. Study head feints explained earlier.
Find an accurate feeling for distance and correct balanced posture while
feinting.


--- PAGE 129 ---
PREPARATIONS

PARRIES



--- PAGE 130 ---


--- PAGE 131 ---


--- PAGE 132 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

K
he
ff
fi

Parrying isa...
light, easy move-
ment depending

‘on timing...

132

Parrying is a sudden movement of the hand from the inside or outside onto an oncoming
blow, to deflect the blow from its original path. It is a light, easy movement depending

i
_&

JHE ECONOMY Base

on timing rather than force. A blow is never parried until the last moment and always
‘when close to the body.

There are three parties — simple, semicircular, circular — to a single offensive movement.

If the attacker's movements are large and badly directed, a simple parry would be the
answer. (Don't forget the stop-hit.) Simple parries tend to be used without discrimina-
tion because they are instinctive movements. Thus, great care must be taken that they
are well-controlled and cover just enough. Avoid any slashing or whipping of the
guards. (Remember simplicity. Study the eight basic defensive positions.)

‘The object in the parry is to use just enough deflecting motion to protect the threat-
ened area. If you over-protect (move the hand too far to one side), you are immediately
vulnerable to disengaging attacks.

To reach out to parry a blow not only makes openings for counter-blows, but also
enables the opponent to change the direction of his blow. Remember, parry late
rather than early.


--- PAGE 133 ---
PREPARATIONS

Parrying is an extremely useful form of defense. It is easily learned, easily performed
and should be used whenever possible. Advantageous openings are created which are
essential to counter-fighting.

Parrying is more refined than blocking which uses force and causes contusion of the
tissues, nerves and bones. Blocking should be used only when it is necessary because it
‘weakens rather than conserves bodily force. A well-delivered blow, even if blocked,
will disturb balance, prevent countering and create openings for other blows.

Successful parries are brought about by placing the defensive hand across the path of
the thrust so that should there be any force in the blow, it would slide off.

Sometimes the fighter must feel that in deflecting the thrust or kick, he is in reality
taking possession of it; that through the contact he obtains, he will feel his opponent's
reactions when the latter realizes his attack has failed.

Only use a parry against a real attack, The opponent's false attacks can be followed with
half positions.

Exercises: The teacher directs strikes or thrusts to different parts of the target. The
student follows these movements but stops when the teacher stops, parrying only the
real attacks. Next, the teacher makes the same threats, but the student does not follow
with his hand. Again, the parry is taken only when the real strike or thrust comes. This
procedure teaches the student to parry only at the last moment.

Against the simple parry (that is, a lateral crossing of hands) attack with disengagement
(on another line).

When making the opposition parry to apply the “beat” parry, your hand should not
swing too far to the right or left. Merely close the line or deflect the opponent's hand,
leaving just enough room to arrive on the target.

‘The beat parry is usually followed by a fast return against the sharp and powerful
opponent.

Semicircular parries are those taken from a high line of engagement to deflect an attack

Sweep away
the thrust from

the target by the
shortest route.

133



--- PAGE 134 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

4,
ih
A

A circular parry
‘envelops the at-
tacker’s wrist and
brings it back to
the original line
of invitation,
while deflect-

ing it off the
target.

134

directed in the low line, or from a low line engagement to a high line. They describe a
half-circle.

‘The parties of octave (low outside) and septime (low inside) are those used for defense
against attacks directed in the low line, but for tactical reasons they can be altematives,
to the parries of sixte (high outside) and quarte (high inside). Study the parries in
fencing.

Against a very fast fighter or one with a marked superiority of height or reach, it is
often necessary to step backwards when making a parry. When parrying with a step
backwards, the parry should be taken as the rear foot moves backwards in the course
of breaking ground. In other words, the parry should be formed with the step back and
not after it has been completed.

The step back as a defensive movement should always be adjusted to the length of the
opponent ’s attacking movements to ensure that the required measure is maintained for
a successful parry and riposte.

A circular parry envelops the attacker's wrist and brings it back to the original line of
invitation, while deflecting it off the target.

‘Sweep away the thrust from the target by the shortest route (with your shoulder re-
laxed) — counter of sixte is taken by moving the hand clockwise, while counter of
quarte will require a counterclockwise rotation of the blade.

A circular parry, when used in the high line, starts under the adversary’s hand; when
used in the low line, it starts over the opponent’s band. The advantages of circular
parries over opposition or beat parries is that they protect a larger amount of the tar-
get and are more difficult to deceive, However, they are not as rapid as the simple
parries. Time spent in speeding them up will pay good dividends.

When using the circular parries, be sure that the hand describes a perfect circle so that
it finishes in its original position. Do not start or finish the parry too soon, for your


--- PAGE 135 ---
PREPARATIONS

hand must follow the opponent's and should meet his hand just before it is about to
arrive on the target.

Use the circular parry also to mess up the opponent who feints.

Compound parries consist of two or more like parries or a combination of different
parries.

Each single parry must be finished, bringing your hand to the “appropriate” position,
before making the succeeding parry.

Mi and vary your parries so the opponent cannot set an attacking plan. The habit of
always reacting to attacks with the same type of parry will obviously play into the hands
of an observant opponent. Thus, it is wise to vary the type of parry used as much as
possible during a bout to keep the opponent guessing. This will cause a certain amount
of hesitation on the part of the attacker whose offensive action will suffer in confi-

dence and penetration. brea

your parries so

pint netsh hadrian Beaaea reales the opponent can-
not set an attack-

What will make parries or blocks more effective? — body positioning, footwork (moving ing plan.

in, circling, etc.) to facilitate ready countering.

Watch out for the opponent's counter.

Experiment sweeping the parry toward the opponent's path (natural easy movements).

Examine parries with all kinds of dodging, shifting, slipping, weaving, ducking, snapping
back, for possible insertion of kicks or a combination of kicks and/or punches. Insert
stopping and covering with kick and punch insertions. Also, be sure to constantly
threaten the opponent with inserts during apparent shifts to various directions (com-
mitments) so as to always be positioning on-guard.

MANIPULATIONS,
THE BEAT

If the opponent is exceptionally fast and will not go for feints, the beat can be used.

135


--- PAGE 136 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

#
be
ff
i,

The correct
opportunity must
be waited for

and seized.

136

‘The beat is a crisp movement of the hand made against the opponent’s with the
object of knocking it aside or obtaining a reaction. Usually the reaction of the fighter
to beat back will offer the advantage of staying ahead of the opponent’s movement
throughout.

Because of the distance, the beat cannot be made at will. The correct opportunity must
bbe waited for and seized. The opponent’s continual change of hand position, often in
the form of half-feints and false attacks, will bring the hand well within reach of a beat.

Although a beat followed by # direct attack can be successful, beats generally bring
about a covering movement to the side on which the hand has been beaten. This makes
adirect attack a difficult stroke to bring off. It is advisable, therefore, to take advan-
tage of such reactions by following the beat with an indirect or compound attack.

‘The beat should be made from the normal guard position into the line in which the
hands are engaged. If a change of engagement is made to beat on another line, the
action is called a change beat.

‘Make the beat sharp and as close to the hand as possible. There are three purposes to
making beats on the hand:

1. To open the line by force or, by the right amount of crispiness on the
‘opponent’s “tension spring,” to secure thread-like penetration.

2, Asa feint before an attack.

8. Asan invitation to the opponent's attack, especially after obtaining his
cadence.

In the first case, the beat on the hand should be made sharply and quickly; practice
trapping or hand immobilization with these two qualities along with the small phasic
bent-knee stance.

In the second case, the beat should be light and fast so as to pass the hand quickly and
execute the attack.

In the third case, it should be made lightly and not too quickly, at the same time being


--- PAGE 137 ---
PREPARATIONS

ready to either parry the attack, counter-time it or follow with a second light and fast
beat to counterattack.

THE BIND

When the hand is engaged, the action of carrying the opponent's hand diagonally
across from a high to a low line or vice versa is called a “bind.” It is performed much
like a semicircular parry.

‘THE CROISE

‘The croise carries the opponent's hand from the high to low line on the same side of
the engagement and does not, as in the bind, carry it diagonally across. It is not exe-
cuted from low to high.

‘THE ENVELOPMENT

‘The envelopment is the action of taking the opponent's hand off its target in a circular
motion and returning it to the Jine of engagement.

THE PRESSURE

‘The pressure is the action of pressing upon the opponent’s hand in order to deflect it
or obtain a reaction to disengage from it.

‘The beat is used prior to a direct attack or to obtain a reaction for an indirect attack.
The bind, croise, envelopment and pressure are mainly elements of trapping prior to an
indirect attack or are simply used to obtain a reaction.

©

‘The bind,

croise, envelop-
‘ment and pres-
sure are mainly
elements of trap-
ping prior to an
indirect attack or
are simply used to
obtain a reaction.

137


--- PAGE 138 ---
#
iA
Hf
fy

MOBILITY

Attain stillness while moving, like thy moon beneath the
waves that ever go on rolling and rocking.

138


--- PAGE 139 ---
DISTANCE

Distance is a continually shifting relationship, depending on the speed, agility and con-
‘trol of both fighters. It is a constant, rapid shifting of ground, seeking the slightest
closing which will greatly increase the chances of hitting the opponent.

‘The maintenance of proper fighting distance has a decisive effect on the outcome of
the fight—acquire the habit!

‘There must be close synchronization between closing and opening distance and the
various actions of the hands and feet. To fight for any length of time within distance
is safe only if you overwhelmingly outclass your opponent in speed and agility.

When taking the guard, it is preferable to fall back a little too far than to come too
close to your opponent. No matter how fast you are able to parry, if a man is close
‘enough to you he will arrive with his attack, for the nature of an attack is such that it
gives the advantage of the initiation to the attacker (providing the correct measure is
there). Likewise, however accurate, fast, economical and timely your attack may be, it
vill fall short unless you have calculated your distance well.

The fighting measure is the distance which a fighter keeps in relation to his opponent.
It is such that he cannot be hit unless his opponent lunges fully at him.

Itis essential that each man lear his own fighting measure, This means in a fight he
‘must allow for the relative agility and speed of himself and his opponent. That is, he
should consistently stay out of distance in the sense that his opponent cannot reach
him with a simple punch, but not so far that, with a short advance, he cannot regain
the distance and be able to reach his opponent with his own powerful attack.

If fighters are constantly on the move when fighting, it is because they are trying to
make their opponent misjudge his distance while being well aware of their own.

Thus, « fighter is constantly gaining and breaking ground in his effort to obtain the
distance which suits him best. Develop the reflex of always maintaining a correct mea-
sure, Instinctive distance pacing is of utmost importance.

MOBILITY

‘There must be
close synchroniza-
tion between clos-
ing and opening
distance.

139


--- PAGE 140 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

4

K
he
A
fi

learn his own
fighting measure.

140

The shielded fighter always keeps himself just out of distance of the opponent's attack
and waits for his opportunity to close the distance himself or to steal a march on the
opponent’s advance. Attack on the opponent's advance or change of distance toward
you. Back him to a wall to cut off his retreat or retreat yourself to draw an advance.

The majority of fencers, when they are preparing an attack or trying to avoid one, take
tums advancing and retreating. This procedure is not advisable in fighting because the
advance and retreat during the assault must be made rapidly, by bounds and at irregular
intervals in such a fashion that the adversary does not notice the action until it is too
late. The opponent should be lulled, then the attack should be launched as suddenly as
possible, accommodating itself to the automatic movements (including the possible
retreat) of the opponent.

‘The art of successful kicking and hitting is the art of correct distance judging. An
attack should be aimed at the distance where the opponent will be when he realizes he
is being attacked and not at the distance prior to the attack. The slightest error can
render the attack harmless.

An attack will rarely succeed unless you can lodge yourself at the correct distance at
the moment it is launched. A parry is most likely to succeed if it can be made just as
the opponent is at the end of his lunge. Many a chance to riposte is missed by the
defender stepping back completely out of distance when he parries. To these examples
must be added the obvious importance of choosing the correct measure, as well as
timing and cadence, when making a counterattack by stop-hit ot time-hit.

Marcelli, past master of fencing, said, “The question whether it is necessary to know in
advance the tempo or the distance is a matter for the philosopher rather than the swords
man to decide. Just the same, it is certain that the combatant has to observe simultane:
ously both the tempo and the distance. And he has to comply with both simultaneously,
with the action, if he wishes to reach his object.”

‘The fighting measure is also governed by the amount of target to be protected (i.e.: the
targets the adversary stresses) and the parts of the body which are most easily within
the adversary’s reach. The shin is most vulnerable and is constantly threatened. If the
‘opponent specializes in shin/knee kicking, you have to take his measure from shin to
shin,

When the correct distance is attained, the attack should be carried through with an
instantaneous burst of energy and speed. A fighter who is in a constant state of physi-


--- PAGE 141 ---
MOBILITY

cal fitness is more apt to get off the mark in a fraction of a second and, therefore, to
seize an opportunity without warning.

DISTANCE IN ATTACK

‘The first principle for fastest contact in attacking from a distance is using the longest to
get at the closest.
Examples Kicking: The leading shin/knee side kick (with a lean)
In striking: The finger jab to eyes
Study the progressive weapons charts.

‘The second principle is economical initiation (non-telegraphic). Apply latent motor
training to intuition,

‘The third principle is correct on-guard position to facilitate freedom of movement
(ease). Use the small phasic bent-knee position.

‘The fourth principle is constant shifting of footwork to secure the correct measure.
Use broken rhythm to confuse the opponent's distance while controlling one’s own.

‘The fifth principle is catching the opponent’s moment of weakness, physically as well
8 psychologically.

‘The sixth principle is correct measure for explosive penetration.

‘The seventh principle is quick recovery or appropriate follow-ups.

‘The “X” principle is courage and decision.

DISTANCE IN DEFENSE

‘The first principle for using distance as a defense is combining sensitive aura with co-
ordinated footwork.

‘The slightest error
can render the
attack harmless.

1a


--- PAGE 142 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

KU
AS
i
fi

When the
correct distance

is attained, the
attack should be
carried through. . .

az

‘The second principle is good judgment of the opponent’s length of penetration, a sense
for receiving his straightening weapon to borrow the half-beat.

‘The third principle is correct on-guard position to facilitate freedom of movement
(ease). Use small phasic bent-knee position.

‘The fourth principleis the use of controlled balance (in motion) without moving out of
position. Study evasiveness.

FOOTWORK

One can only develop an instinctive sense of distance if he is able to move about
smoothly and speedily.

‘The quality of a man’s technique depends on his footwork, for one cannot use his
hands or kicks efficiently until his feet have put him in the desired position. If a man
is slow on his feet, he will be slow with his punches and kicks. Mobility and speed of
footwork precede speed of kicks and punches.

Mobility is definitely stressed in Jeet Kune Do because combat is a matter of motion,
an operation of finding a target or of avoiding being a target. In this art, there is no
nonsense of squatting on a classical horse stance for three long years before moving.
This type of unnecessary, strenuous standing is not functional, for it is basically a
seeking of firmness in stillness. In Jeet Kune Do, one finds firmness in movement,
which is real, easy and alive, Therefore, springiness and alertness of footwork is the
theme.

During sparring, a sparmate is constantly on the move to make his opponent misjudge
his distance, while being quite certain of his own. In fact, the length of the step for-
ward and backward is regulated to that of his opponent. A good man always maintains
such a position as to enable him, while keeping just out of range, to be yet near enough
to immediately take an opening (ref.: the fighting measure). Thus, at a normal distance,
he is able to prevent his opponent from attacking him by his fine sense of distance and
timing. As a result, his opponent is then compelled to keep shortening his distance, to
come nearer and nearer until he is too near!

Mobility is vitally important in defense as well, for a moving target is definitely harder


--- PAGE 143 ---
MOBILITY

tobit and kick. Footwork can and will beat any kick or punch. The more adept a
fighter is at footwork, the less does he make use of his arms in avoiding kicks and blows.
By means of skillful and timely sidestepping and slipping, he can get clear of almost

any kick and punch, thus preserving both of his guns, as well as his balance and energy,
for counters.

Also, by constantly being in small motion, the fighter can initiate a movement much
more snappily than from a position. It is not recommended, therefore, that you stay
too long on the same spot, Always use short steps to alter the distance between you

and your opponent. Vary the length of your step, however, as well as the speed, for

added confusion to your opponent.

Footwork in Jeet Kune Do tends to aim toward simplification with a minimum of
movement. Do not get carried away and stand on your toes and dance all over the
place like a fancy boxer, Economical footwork not only adds speed but, by moving
just enough to evade the opponent’s attack, it commits him fully. The simple idea is
to get where you are safe and he isn't.

f ‘The quality of a
Above all, footwork should be easy and relaxing. The feet are kept at a comfortable Eeqyesiess

distance apart according to the individual, without any strain or awkwardness. By now —_ depends on his
the reader should see the unrealistic approach of the traditional, classical footwork and
stances. They are slow and awkward and, to put it plainly, nobody moves like that in a
fight! A martial artist is required to shift in any direction at split second notice.

Moving is used as a means of defense, a means of deception, a means of securing proper
distance for attack and a means of conserving energy. The essence of fighting is the art
of moving.

Footwork enables you to break ground and escape punishment, to get out of a tight
comer, to allow the heavy slugger to tire himself in his vain attempts to land a devasta-
ting punch; it also puts pep into the punch.

‘The greatest phase of footwork is the coordination of punching and kicking in motion,
Without footwork, the fighter is like artillery that cannot be moved or a policeman in
the wrong place at the wrong time.

‘The value of a couple of good hands and fast, powerful kicking depends mostly on

143


--- PAGE 144 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

#
A
A
fi

In Jeet Kune Do,
one finds firmness
in movement,
which is real,

easy and alive.

14a

their being on a well-balanced and quickly movable base. It is essential, therefore, to
preserve the balance and poise of the fighting turret carrying your artillery. No matter
in what direction or at what speed you move, your aim is to retain the fundamental
stance which has been found the most effective for fighting. Let the movable pedestal
be as nimble as possible.

‘The correct style in fighting is that which, in its absolute naturalness, combines velocity
and power of hitting with the soundest defense.

Good footwork means good balance in action and from this springs hitting power and
the ability to avoid punishment. Every movement involves the coordination of hands,
feet and brain.

A fighter should not be flatfooted but should fee! the floor with the balls of his feet
as though they were strong springs, ready to accelerate or retard his movements as
required by changing conditions.

Use the feet cleverly to maneuver and combine balanced movement with aggression
and protection. Above all, keep cool.
# ~~ The foundation is sensitivity of aura.
# The second is aliveness and naturalness.
# — The third is instinctive pacing (distance and timing).
# ~The fourth is correct placement of the body.
# ~The fifth is a balanced position at the end.
Use your own footwork and your opponent's to your advantage. Note his pattern, if
any, of advancing and retreating. Vary the length and speed of your own step.

‘The length of the step forward or backward should be approximately regulated to that
of the opponent.

Variations of measure will make it more difficult for the opponent to time his attacks
or preparations, A fighter with a good sense of distance or one who is difficult to
reach in launching an attack may often be brought to the desired measure by progres-
sively shortening a series of steps backward or by gaining distance toward him when he
lunges (stealing the march),


--- PAGE 145 ---
MOBILITY

‘The simplest and most fundamental tactic to use on an opponent is to gain just

enough distance to facilitate a hit. ‘The idea is to press (advance) a step or so and then
fall back (retreat), inviting the opponent to follow. Allow your opponent to advance a
step or two and then, at the precise moment he lifts his foot for still another step, you
must suddenly lunge forward into his step.

An opponent difficult to reach may be reached by a series of progressive steps — the
first one must be smooth and economical.

Small and rapid steps are recommended as the only way to keep perfect balance, exact
distance and the ability to apply sudden attacks or counterattacks.

Sure footwork and balance are necessary to be able to advance and retreat in and out
of distance with respect to both your own and your opponent's reach. Knowing when
to advance and when to retreat is also knowing when to attack and when to protect.

‘A good man steals, creates and changes the vital spatial relations to the confusion of root work in Jeet

Bis opponent. Kune Do tends to
aim toward
simplification.

Practice your footwork with a view to keeping a very correct and precise distance in
relation to your opponent and move just enough to accomplish your purpose. Fine
distancing will make the opponent strive that much harder, and thus bring him close
enough to be subject to efficient counterblows.

‘To move at the right time is the foundation of great skill in fighting, not just to move
at the right time but also to be in the best position for attack or counter. It means
balance, but balance in movement,

Having your feet in the correct position serves as a pivot for your entire attack. It
balances you properly and lends unseen power to your blows, just as it does in sports
like baseball where drive and power seem to come up from the legs.

To maintain balance while constantly shifting body weight is an art few ever acquire.

Correct placement of your feet will ensure balance and mobility — experiment with

145


--- PAGE 146 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

yourself. You must feel with your footwork. Rapid and easy footwork is a matter of
correct distribution of weight.

and to be so balanced as to resist blows from all angles. Remember the small phasic
bent-knee stance.

A ‘The ideal position of the feet is one that enables you to move quickly in any direction

The rear heel is raised because:
1. When you punch, you transfer all your weight quickly to your lead leg. This
is easier if the rear heel is already slightly raised.
2. When you are punched and have to “give” a bit, you sink down on the rear
heel. This acts as a kind of spring and takes the edge out of a punch.
3. It makes the back foot easier to move.

‘The rear heel is the piston of the whole fighting machine.

‘The feet must always be directly under the body. Any movement of the feet which
tends to unbalance the body must be eliminated. The on-guard position is one of per-
fect body balance and should always be maintained, especially as regards the feet. Wide
steps or leg movements which require a constant shift of weight from one leg to the
other cannot be used. During this shift of weight, there is a moment when balance is

146


--- PAGE 147 ---
MOBILITY

precarious and so renders attack or defense ineffective. Also, the opponent can time
your shifting for his attack.

Short steps while moving ensure balance in attack. Also, the body balance is always
maintained so that any offensive or defensive movement required is not limited or
impaired as the fighter moves forward, backward or circles his opponent. Thus, it is
better to take two medium steps rather than one long one to cover the same distance.

Variations of measure will make it more difficult for the opponent to time his attacks
or preparation.

Unless there is a tactical reason for acting otherwise, gaining and breaking ground is
executed by means of small and rapid steps. A correct distribution of weight on both
legs will make for perfect balance, enabling the fighter to get off the mark quickly
and easily whenever the measure is right for attacks.

‘ Every movement
Lighten the stance so the force of inertia to be overcome will be less. The best way to in Olver the co.

Jeam proper footwork is to shadow box many rounds, giving special attention to be- ordination of
coming light on your feet. Gradually, this way of stepping around will become natural hands, feet and
to you and you will do it easily and mechanically without giving it a thought. brain.

You should operate in the same manner as a graceful ballroom dancer who uses the
feet, ankles and calves. He slithers around the floor.

‘The accent is on speedy footwork and the tendency toward attack with a step forward
(drill! drill! drili), often combined with an attack on the hand.

‘There are only four moves possible in footwork:
1. Advancing
2. Retreating
3. Circling right
4. Circling left

However, there are important variations of each, as well as the necessity of coordinat~
ing each fundamental movement with punches and kicks. The following are
some examples:

147


--- PAGE 148 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

4

x
eo
Kf

fi

Lighten the
stance so the
force of inertia
to be overcome
will be less.

148

‘The forward shuffle: This is a forward advance of the body, without disturbing body
balance, which can only be performed through a series of short steps forward. These
steps must be so small that the feet are not lifted at all, but slide along the floor. The
whole body maintains the fundamental position throughout; this is the key. Once
body feel results, combine the step with tools. The body is poised for either sudden
attack or a defensive maneuver. Its primary purpose is to create openings (by the
opponent's defensive reactions) and to draw leads.

‘The backward shuffle: The principle is the same as that of the forward shuffle; do it,
without disturbing the on-guard position. Remember that both feet are on the floor
at all times, permitting balance to be maintained for attack or defense. It is used to
draw leads or to draw the opponent off-balance, thus creating openings.

‘The quick advance: Remember that though this is a fast, sudden movement forward,
balance must be kept. The body flattens toward the floor rather than leaping into the
air. It is not a hop. In all respects, it is the same as a wide step forward where the rear
foot is brought immediately into position. Get the body feel with tools.

‘The step forward and the step back: Gaining and breaking ground may be used as a
preparation of attack. The step forward is obviously used to obtain the correct dis-
tance for attacking and the step back can be used to draw the opponent within dis-
tance. “Drawing” an opponent usually means drawing out of distance from a lead by
swaying back from the hips, or making use of the feet in such a way that the lead will
just fall short. Its object is to lure your opponent within reach at a crucial moment,
while staying out of reach yourself.

The step forward will add speed to the attack when it is combined with a feint (forcing
the opponent to commit himself) or a preparation (to tie and close the boundaries). If
the step forward is made with the line of engagement covered, the attacker will be in
the best position to deal with a stop-hit launched during this movement.

‘The step back can be used tactically against an opponent who has formed the habit of
retiring whenever any feint or other offensive movement is made and is, therefore, very
difficult to reach, especially if he is superior in height and length.

Constant steps forward and back with a carefully regulated length can conceal a player's
intentions and enable him to lodge himself at the ideal distance for an attack, often as
the opponent is off-balance.


--- PAGE 149 ---
MOBILITY

Circling right: ‘The right lead leg becomes a movable pivot that wheels the whole body
to the right until the correct position is resumed. The first step with the right foot may
be as short or as long as necessary — the longer the step, the greater the pivot. The fun-
damental position must be maintained at all times. The right hand should be carried
alittle higher than ordinary in readiness for the opponent’s left counter. Moving to

the right may be used to nullify an opponent's right lead hook. It may be used to get
into position for left hand counters and it can be used to keep the opponent off-
balance. The important things to remember are never step s0 as to cross the feet, move
deliberately and without excess motion.

Circling left: This is a more precise movement requiring shorter steps. It is used to keep
out of range of rear, left hand blows from a right stancer. It also creates good position
for the delivery of a hook ot jab. It is more difficult but safer than moving to the right
and, therefore, should be used more often.

‘The step-in/step-out: This is the start of an offensive maneuver, often used as a feint in
order to build up an opening. The foot movement is always combined with kicking and
punching movement. The initial movement (the step-in) is directly in, with the hands
held high as if to hit or kick, then out quickly before the opponent can adjust his
defense, Lull the opponent with this maneuver, then attack when he is motorset. Pee
tinuous process
of hit-and-away.

‘The quick retreat: This is a fast, fluid, forceful backward movement, allowing further
retreat if necessary or a stepping forward to attack if desired.

Ifit is necessary to combine a step back with a parry, it is because one is pressed for
time. The parry must, therefore, be made at the beginning of the retreating move-
ment — that is to say, when the rear foot moves.

When the opponent's offensive action is a compound one, the correct coordination will
be to perform the first parry simultaneously with the movement of the rear foot, and
the remaining parry, or parries, simultaneously with the retreating lead foot.

‘The step back can be taken first, but this should only be the case when the attack has
been prepared with a step forward and not when the attack has been made with a step
forward.

To a man with quick footwork and a good lead, the art comes easily enough. It is a
continuous process of hitand-away. As your opponent moves in, you meet him with

149


--- PAGE 150 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

hu
ib
ff
fi

‘The turret carry-
ing the artillery
must remain well-
poised, a constant
threat to

your foe,

180

a defensive hit with the lead and immediately step back; then, as he follows-up, you
repeat the process, continually retreating around the ring, As you do so, frequently
check yourself in your stride and temporarily stop to meet him with a straight right or
left or occasionally both.

‘Success in “‘milling on the retreat” takes good judgment of distance and the ability to
stop in your retreat quickly and unexpectedly. The common fault is to deliver your
blow while actually on the move instead of properly stopping to do it. Develop great
rapidity in passing from defense to attack and then back to defense again.

Remember, do not attempt to hit while backing away, Your weight has to shift for-
ward. Step back, halt, then hit or leam to shift your body weight momentarily forward
while the foot backs up.

Whether on the offensive or retreating, one should strive to be a confusing and diffi-
cult target. One should not move in a straight forward or in a straight backward
direction.

When avoiding or maneuvering your opponent by footwork, keep as near to him as
you can for retaliatory purposes. Move lightly, feeling the floor as a springboard, ready
to snap in with a punch, kick or a counterpunch or kick.

‘To retreat from hicks is to give the adversary room so it is wise, at times, to crowd and
smother his preparation and gain time consequently with a stop-hit.

Sidestepping: Sidestepping is actually shifting the weight and changing the feet with-
out disturbing balance in an effort to quickly gain a more advantageous position from
which to carry the attack. It is used to avoid straight forward rushes and to move
quickly out of range. When an opponent rushes you, it is not so much the rush you
sidestep as some particular blow he leads during the rush.

Sidestepping is a safe, sure and valuable defensive tactic. You can use it to frustrate an
attack simply by moving every time an opponent gets set to attack or you may use it
as a method of avoiding blows or kicks. It may also be used to create openings for a
counterattack.

Sidestepping may be performed by shifting the body forward, which is called a “for-
ward drop.”” This is a pretty safe position with the head in close, the hands carried


--- PAGE 151 ---
MOBILITY

high and ready to strike the opponent’s groin, or stomp on his insteps, or carry a two-
fisted hooking attack. The forward drop, also called a “drop shift,” is used to gain
tither the outside or inside guard position and is, therefore, a very useful technique in
in-fighting or grappling. It is also a vehicle for countering. It requires timing, speed
and judgment to properly execute and may be combined with the jab, straight left,
left and right hooks.

The same step may also be performed directly to the right or left or back, depending
on the degree of safety needed or the plan of action.

Properly used, sidestepping is not only one of the prettiest moves, but is also a method
of escaping all kinds of attacks and countering an opponent when he least expects it.
‘The art of sidestepping, as of ducking and slipping, is to move late and quick. You
‘wait until your opponent's kick or blow is almost on you and then take a quick step
either to the right or left.

In nearly all cases, you move first the foot nearest the direction you intend to go in. ‘When an

Inorder to do the step in the quickest possible manner, the body should sway over in ‘opponent rushes

the direction you are going slightly before the step is made. The rear foot then follows bacco potesiten

quickly and naturally and, in sidestepping a rush, the fighter turns immediately and you sidestep as

counters his man as he flies past him. some particular
blow he leads dur-
ing the rush.

When sidestepping a lead, the counter is naturally quite easy. Not so after a rush for to
counter effectively here, a fighter has to keep very close to his opponent, moving just
‘enough to make him miss. The fighter must then turn extraordinarily quickly to be on
him before he has flashed past.

Remember, when an opponent rushes you, it is not so much the rush you sidestep as
some particular kick or blow he leads during the rush; indeed, if you step to the side
of your opponent without catching sight of some blow to get outside of, you will be
very liable to run into a hook or a swii

Sidestepping right: Carry the right lead foot sharply to the right and forward, a dis-
tance of about 18 inches. Bring up the left foot an equal distance behind the right.
The step serves to swing the body to the left, bringing the right side farther forward
and closer to the opponent’s left rear ( when in a right stance himself). For that reason,
the right sidestep is not used as frequently as the one to the left. Most of the weaving
and sidestepping is to the left, keeping you closer to his right and farther away from

his left rear hand. (The situation changes in right-stancer versus left-stancer.)

151


--- PAGE 152 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

ri

he
A
fy

Aim always to
move fluidly but
retain the relative
position of

the two feet.

152

Occasionally, a right sidestep is taken just to vary the direction of the weaving and,
even less frequently in, slipping a right lead, getting inside of it to counter with a left.
It is used in starting a left to the body.

Sidestepping left: From the fundamental right stance position, bring the left foot
sharply to the left and forward a distance of about 18 inches. This should carry you
to the outside of the opponent's right jab. You will find just as you take the step to
the left, the left side of your body swings forward and the right side back, so that you
rotate toward the opponent's right flank. As you complete this half-circle movement,
you will find that your right foot is again in its normal position ahead of the left foot.

If you have taken the sidestep to the left to avoid the opponent's right lead, you
should sway your body and duck your head (without losing balance) in the direction
of the step ~ that is to the left. His right will swish by, over your head, in the
direction of your right shoulder. Now, as you wheel to the right toward the opponent,
you have his whole right flank exposed and can quickly land a left to the body or jaw
with telling effect.

Remember this simple thought: Move first the foot closest to the direction you wish
to go in. In other words, if you wish to sidestep to the left, move the left foot first
and vice versa. Also, in all hand techniques, the hand moves first, before the foot.
When foot techniques are used, of course, move the foot first, before the hand.

Remember also to always retain the fundamental stance. No matter what you do with
that moving pedestal, the turret carrying the artillery must remain well-poised, a con-
stant threat to your foe. Aim always to move fluidly but retain the relative position of
the two feet.

Examine footwork for:
1. Body feel and control, as a whole, in neutralness,
2. Attack and defense capability at all times.
3. Ease and comfort in every direction.


--- PAGE 153 ---
MOBILITY

4. Application of efficient leverage during all phases of movement.
5. Superb balancing at all times.
6. _Elusiveness in well-protected corresponding structure and correct distancing.

Experiment on the following mechanics and feeling of footwork:
1, Footwork to be evasive'and soft if the opponent is rushing.
2, Footwork to avoid contact point (as if the opponent is armed with a knife.)

‘The ultimate aim is still to obtain the brim of the fire-line on the opponent's final real
thrusts.

Remember, mobility and rapidity of footwork and speed of execution are primary
qualities. Practice footwork and more footwork.

Footwork can be gained also by skipping rope (an exercise to learn how to handle
one’s body weight lightly), sparring (the learning of distance and timing in footwork)

and shadow kickboxing (homework for sparring).
Mobility and

rapidity of foot
work and speed of
Running will also strengthen the legs to supply boundless energy for efficient operation, xecution are pri
mary qualities.

Increase control of the legs through medium squatting posture exercises and ape-
imitation movement (low walking).

Incorporate alternate leg splits for flexibility.

No matter how simple the strokes being practiced in the lesson are or whether they are
of an offensive or defensive nature, the practitioner must be made to combine foot-
work with them, He must be made to advance or retire before, while and after the
stroke he is working on has been executed. In this way, he will acquire a natural sense
of distance and develop great mobility.

Practice footwork variations along with
1. _ kicking tools
2. hand tools
3. covered hand and/or knee positions

153


--- PAGE 154 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

EVASIVENESS

During fighting, there is a good deal of parrying, especially with the rear hand, but it is
better to use footwork — duck and counter, snap back and retum, slip and punch.

A
be
ff

SLIPPING

Slipping is avoiding a blow without actually moving the body out of range. It is used
primarily against straight leads and counters. It calls for exact timing and judgment

Pte eae blew and, to be effective, it must be executed to that the blow is escaped only by the
without setually smallest fraction.
moving the body
out of range.

It is possible to slip either a Jeft or a right lead. Actually, slipping is more often used
‘on the forward hand lead because it is safer. The outside slip, that is, dropping to a
position outside the opponent’s left or right lead, is safest and leaves the opponent un-
able to defend against a counterattack.

Slipping is a most valuable technique, leaving both hands free to counter. It is the real
basis of counter-fighting and is performed by the expert.

1s4


--- PAGE 155 ---
MOBILITY

Slipping inside a left lead ~ As the opponent leads a straight ieft, drop your weight
back to your rear left leg by quickly tuming your right shoulder and body to the left.

(caponens. in Loft
atusice)
et XO

Your left foot remains stationary but your right shoulder pivots inward. This move-
ment allows his left hand to slip over your right shoulder as you obtain the inside
guard position

Slipping outside a left lead — As the opponent leads a straight left, shift your weight
right and forward over your right leg, swinging your left shoulder forward. The blow
will slip over your left shoulder. A short step forward and to the right with your right

foot facilitates the movement. Your hands should be carried high in a guard position, Slipping is tbe real

basis of counter-
fighting and is per-
formed by the
expert.

stance)

Slipping inside a right lead — As the opponent leads a right punch, shift your weight
over your lead right leg, thus moving your body slightly to the right and forward.
Bring your left shoulder quickly forward. In doing so, the punch will slip over your
left shoulder. Be sure to rotate your left hip inward and bend your left knee slightly.
The inside position is the preferred position for attack. Move your head separately
only if the slip is too narrow.

Slipping outside a right lead — As the opponent leads a right, drop your weight back
on your left leg and quickly turn your right shoulder and body to the right. Your
right foot remains stationary and your left toc pivots inward. ‘The punch will slip
harmlessly by. Drop your right hand slightly, but hold it ready to drive an uppercut

158


--- PAGE 156 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

156

to the opponent's body. Your left hand should be held high, near your right shoulder,
ready to counter to his chin.

Another method is to shift your weight to your left leg and pivot your right heel out-
ward so that your right shoulder and your body turn to the left. Drop your right hand
slightly and keep your left hand high, near your right shoulder.

When slipping, the shoulder roll will shift your head — don’t tilt it unnaturally.

‘Try to always hit on the slip, particularly when moving forward. You can hit harder
when stepping inside a punch than when you block and counter or parry and counter.

‘The key to successful slipping often lies in a little movement of the heel. For example,
if it is desired to slip a lead to the right so that it passes over your left shoulder, your
left heel should be lifted and twisted outwards. Transferring your weight to your
right foot and twisting your shoulders will set you up nicely to counter.

To slip a lead over your right shoulder with a defensive movement to the left, your
right heel should be twisted in similar fashion. Your weight is thus shifted to your
left foot and your left shoulder is to the rear, so you are favorably placed to counter
with a right hook.

If you remember that the shoulder over which you desire to slip a blow and the heel
to be twisted are one and the same, you will not go far wrong. Exceptions are move-
ments similar to the first description of ‘slipping outside a right lead.””

DUCKING

Ducking is dropping the body forward under swings and hooks (hands or feet) directed
at the head. It is executed primarily from the waist. Ducking is used as a means of
escaping blows and allowing the fighter to remain in range for a counterattack. It is
just as necessary to learn to duck swings and hooks as it is to slip straight punches.
Both are important in counterattacks.

‘THE SNAP BACK

‘The snap back means simply to snap the body away from a straight lead enough to
make the opponent miss. As the opponent's arm relaxes to his body, it is possible to


--- PAGE 157 ---
MOBILITY

move in with a stiff counter. This is a very effective technique against a lead jab and
may also be used as the basis of the one-two combination blow.

ROLLING

Rolling nullifies the force of a blow by moving the body with it.
# Against a straight blow, the movement is backward.
# Against hooks, the movement is to either side.
# Against uppercuts, it is backward and away.
# Against hammers, it is a circular movement down to either side.

THE SLIDING ROLL

‘The fundamental asset of the clever fighter is the sliding roll. He spots the punch or a
high kick coming, perhaps instinctively, and takes one step back, sweeping his head

back and underneath. He is now in a position to come up with several handy blows or
kicks into nice openings.

THE BODY SWAY
(bob and weave)

_ The art of swaying renders the fighter more difficult to hit and gives him more power,
particularly with the hook. It is useful in that it leaves the hands open for attack, im-
proving the defense and providing opportunities to hit hard when openings occur.

157


--- PAGE 158 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

a
A

Af

‘The key to swaying is relaxation and the stiff, rigid type of boxer must be easier to
. Mechanics of the bob:
1. Sink under the swing or hook with a single, perfectly controlied movement.

deal with than the ever-swaying type.

2. Bring your fists in toward your opponent for guarding or attacking.

3, Maintain a nearly normal punching position with your legs and feet, even at
the bottom of the bob. Use your knees to provide the motion

4, Maintain at all times the normal slipping position of your head and shoulders
for defense against straight punches. It is extremely important that you be
in position to slip at any stage of the bob.

5. Don’t counter on a straight-down bob except, perhaps, with a straight thrust
to the groin. Weave to apply delayed counters with whirling straight

Weaving is punches or hooks.
used to make
an opponent miss

and to sustain a
counterattack Purposes of the weave:
with both hands. 1. To make a moving target of your head (from side to side)

2. To make your opponent uncertain about which way you will slip if he

punches st you.
3. To make your opponent uncertain about which fist you will throw when

you punch.

Weaving means moving the body in, out and around a straight lead to the head. It is
used to make an opponent miss and to sustain a counterattack with both hands.

Weaving is based on slipping and is a circular movement of the upper trunk and head,
right or left,

Weaving to the inside ~ On a right lead, slip to the outside position (figure A). Drop
your head and upper body, move in under the extended right lead and then up to the

158


--- PAGE 159 ---
MOBILITY

basic position. The opponent's right lead now approximates your left shoulder
(figure B). Carry your hands high and close to your body. As your body moves to.
the inside position, place your open right hand on the opponent’s left. Later, counter
with a right blow on the slip, then a left and right as the weave is performed.

Weaving to the outside — As the opponent leads a right punch, slip to the inside
position (figure B) and place your right hand on the opponent's left. Now, move your
head and body to the left and upward in a circular movement so that the opponent's
right lead approximates your right shoulder. Your body is now on the outside of the
opponent's lead and in the basic position (figure A). Carry both hands high and close.

Remember, weaving is based on slipping and thus, mastery of slipping helps to obtain
skill in weaving. It is more difficult than slipping, but a very effective defense maneu-
ver once perfected.

‘The weave is rarely used by itself. Almost invariably, the weave is used with the bob. Almost every
‘The purpose of the bob and weave is to slide under the opponent's attack and get to fighter at one

close-quarters. The real bobber-weaver is always a hooking specialist. It is the perfect pad peo :

attack for one to use against taller opponents. Break your rhythm often when you prpeet a

use it, Don’t be a rhythmatic bobber-weaver. Sometimes when you slip inside a loses some of his

punch, you counter terrifically as you step. Evasiveness should not be practiced with- command and

out hitting or kicking to counter. must protect
himself.

In addition, while the punches are coming, keep your eyes open every minute. The
punches will not wait for you. ‘They will strike unexpectedly and, unless you are
trained well enough to spot them, they will be hard to stop.

‘The elbows and forearms are used for protection against body punches. Blows aimed
at the head are swept aside by the hand when you are not sliding and countering.

Almost every fighter at one time or another reaches a dangerous spot where he loses
some of his command and must protect himself. When this time comes, it is wise to
have learned good defense.

159


--- PAGE 160 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

fu
be

.

ff
fi

ATTACK

There is nothing much in this art. Take things as they are.
Punch when you have to punch; kick when you have to kick.

160


--- PAGE 161 ---
ATTACK

. ATTACK!

There is tittle direct attack in Jeet Kune Do. Practically all offensive action is indirect,
coming after a feint or taking the form of countering after an opponent's attack is
foiled or spent — it requires agile maneuvering, feinting and drawing an opponent, a
scientific plan.

‘There are two basic moments for attack:
1. When our own will decides the time of attack,

2. When the moment of attack depends upon the opponent's movement or the
failure of his action.

Ifa fighter concentrates sufficiently, senses the moment to attack and acts upon it
swiftly and decisively, the prospects of success are greatly enhanced.

‘There will be an even better chance of success if the direct attack is launched when the
opponent is moving his arm away from the line in which one wishes to attack. This is Conserve your
important. ‘energy but attack
decisively, confi-
—- dently and with a
single mind.

‘The Psychophysical Process of Attack

Survey: The survey is entirely mental and could be sub-divided into two parts

a. Definable: For instance, the estimation of the correct distance
between the fighters or the appearance of an opening.
b. Instinctive: Whether the opponent will attack or retire.

2. Decision: This is also a mental function, but the netves and muscles are alerted in
preparation for execution. During this phase, the fighter decides how
to attack. For example, should it be from a short distance with a direct
attack or should he, from a long distance, use a compound attack?
Alternatively, he could attack with a second intention or in any other
way he considers will be successful.

Action: The brain has given the muscles the order which they now execute, but
even in the execution, the fighter has to be prepared for the possibility
of an interception, counter, etc. ‘Thus, it is both essential und obvious
that mental and physical alertness be maintained throughout the fight.

Conserve your energy but attack decisively, confidently and with a single mind.

161


--- PAGE 162 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

A
ih
A

Attacks on
the completion
are made after
the opponent has
brought himself
within thrust-
ing range on

his lunge.

162

Primary and Secondary Attack

Primary

‘These are attacks initiated by oneself with the intention of scoring by pace, fraud or
force.

Pace: A direct attack is made on the lunge to hit the opponent with superior
neatness and quickness before he can parry, without any attempt to
disguise the direction of the attack,

Fraud: An indirect attack may be used to deceive or evade with the first half
of the thrust. A feint may precede the attack to induce your opponent,
through some preliminary movement, to think that you are going to
hit him in one particular line. On his offering a parry to protect that
line, you may then deceive it and be free to complete the attack by
lunging in another line.

Force: Upon finding your opponent covered, you attack his hand with
sufficient vigor to turn it aside and make an opening for your hand
on the lunge.

Secondary

‘These are attacks intended to out-maneuver or retaliate attacks initiated by the oppo-
nent in one or another of their different stages.

Attacks on the preparation are used to arrest his movement before he matures his plan.

Attacks on the development are principally “time” attacks. Having anticipated in
what line your opponent’s attack will be delivered, you intercept his arm as he begins
his attack and meet him by straightening in the counter.

Attacks on the completion are made after the opponent has brought himself within
thrusting range on his lunge. These ripostes are made from the position of the parry,
whatever it may be, once the opponent's primary attack has been diverted. They may
be thrown while the opponent is extended on the lunge or during his act of recovery,
but they are, almost without exception, unaccompanied by any movement of the foot.

Decoy or false attacks may be used in any of the three stages as preparation for the
secondary attacks. Thus used, they are not made with the intention of hitting the
opponent, but only to lure him into, say, attacking you in some line so that you may


--- PAGE 163 ---
=

disconcert him with an emphatic parry and lead up to an effective return. These

attacks, therefore, are not made on the lunge for a slight movement of the foot (if any)

is all that is needed.

A hit (hand or foot) is made by using the stroke which corresponds to that of the
opponent, taking advantage of the opportunity to deliver it with proper timing.

Against an opponent who opens up his target or makes wild actions, for instance,
counter-timing into his action or stop-kicking into his advanced target or exposed
areas as he moves forward are particularly effective.

A fighter who is observant will not carry on stubbornly with strokes that are no longer

the right ones. So many fighters put down the failure of an offensive stroke to a lack
of speed rather than to the incorrect choice of stroke. The pro knows better.

Each fighter, therefore, has to be studied from the several angles of style, tactics and
cadence before a definite plan of action involving a choice of stroke is finally decided
upon.

Fighters can be placed into two main categories: the “mechanical” fighter and the
“intellectual” fighter. It’s easy for the mechanical fighter to give advice because his
fighting techniques and tactics are the result of the mechanical repetition of strokes,
bred of a lesson which was purely‘automatic and lacking an intelligent explanation of
the why, the how and the when. Their fighting follows a similar pattern in each
successive encounter.

‘The intelligent fighter will never hesitate to change tactics in order to use the correct
strokes to deal with his opponent, It must be plain by now that the fighter’s decision
to use any particular stroke must be influenced by his opponent’s technique and
method of fighting.

The on-guard position, the alive, controlled parry, the timely simple attack, the sensi-
tive, well-regulated advance and retreat, the blinding lunge and the speedy, balanced
recovery must all be learned thoroughly. Acquire the appropriate neuro-muscular
perception of all these so that they only require passing attention and you may be
free to concentrate on your adversary, his ploy and your solution of his attack and
defense. Freedom of movement, balance and confidence accompany a practiced cer-
tainty of the fundamental movements.

ATTACK

‘The intelligent
fighter will never
hesitate to change
tactics in order to
use the correct
strokes to deal
with his opponent.

163


--- PAGE 164 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

A
be
A
fi

Toaltack,

you must study
the adversary’s
weaknesses and
strengths and take
advantage of the
former while
avoiding the
latter.

164

To attack, you must study the adversary’s weaknesses and strengths and take advan-
tage of the former while avoiding the latter.

If your opponent has a good hand for parrying, for instance, the attacks should be
preceded by a beat, press or feint that might disorganize the functioning of the parry.

All attacking movements must be made as small as possible; that is, with the least
deviation of the hand necessary to induce the opponent to react. Caution demands
that the attack should be completed covered, or augmented by any necessary defensive
tactics whenever possible.

The form of an attack is generally dictated by the form of defense used by the oppo-
nent. In other words, between opponents of approximately the same caliber, an
attack can rarely be successful unless it deceives or outwits the defense. For instance,
an attack made with a circular movement cannot succeed if the defender meets it with
a simple or lateral movement in his parry. It is, therefore, essential to correctly antici-
pate an opponent's reaction if the attack is to succeed. Your final choice of stroke
should be based on your observation of the opponent’s reactions, habits and prefer.
ences.

[tis dangerous for a fighter to launch himself into complicated compound attacks

where there are several periods of movement-time in which an opponent can land a
stop-hit.

‘The more complicated the attack, the more chance there is of an unpremeditated
counter-offensive movement being executed out of hand. This being the case, the
attack proper must remain simple, whatever form the preparation may have taken.

PREPARATION OF ATTACK

Because of the wide measure the opponent maintains, the gaining of distance has to be
“covered” by some action which will momentarily distract the opponent's attention,
This action may be:

1 a variation of distance

2. attacks on the closer targets (usually lead leg, extended hand, groin)
3. a combination of the above two

4. acombination of attacks to disturb


--- PAGE 165 ---
A preparation of attack is the action taken by the attacker to make an opening for his
attack. It usually consists of some movement which will deflect the attacking oppo-
nent’s extended lead or obtain a desired reaction (for an opening) and will afford a
change of distance.

‘An aggressive opponent can often be drawn within distance by a series of steps back-
ward which are progressively shortened; a wary opponent can sometimes be mancu-
vered into the same position by a series of steps forward and backward of varying
length.

Fighters resort to preparations in an attempt to obtain some form of reaction from
their opponents when feints have failed to fulfill that purpose.

Feints preceded by beats or trappings of the hand can upset the defender's confidence
and force him to move to a defensive action against his will. His defensive action may
then be deceived in the attack.

Beats, change-beats, engagements and changes of engagement will either fix the oppo-
nent’s hand in a particular line, causing him to contract and slow down his reactions,
or will make him parry sooner or with less control than he intended. Whatever the re-
action, it may pave the way for a successful simple attack.

By deflecting or trapping the hand while stepping forward, the possibility of a success-
ful stop-hit from the opponent has been limited, Likewise, obstructing the leg as a
preliminary step is very effective.

When trapping, make sure the lines are either covered or augmented with trunk sway-
ing or supplementary guards. The movements must be tight. Also, seize any oppor-
tunity to stop-hit or time-hit in the midst of trapping.

‘Trapping the hand, beats or opposition on the hand can make it difficult for the
adversary to parry by confusing him. Watch out for disengagement. If he is a habitual
disengager, stop-hit him by first feinting the preparation, then attacking with the trap.

When a step forward and an action on the opponent’s hand are made simultaneously,
it is known as a compound preparation. Its success depends on perfect coordination
of both the hands and feet. Much time must be given to the practice of this type of

action,

ATTACK

A preparation of
attack is the
action taken by
the attacker to
make an opening
for his attack.

165


--- PAGE 166 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

4

Hy
he
Af

fi

Do not hurl
yourself at your
opponent, but
gain and maintain
distance in a calm
and precise
manner.

166

Experiment on the above with the idea of using economical trapping to either immo-
bilize or draw 2 reaction and then, slipping in a solid, maiming thrust or kick to an
extremely delicate vital spot.

When advancing for the preparation of attack, pay particular attention to your balance
and foot control so that you can halt your movement forward with the least possible
effort. Short, rapid steps will ensure this, as your center of gravity is less likely to be
shifted than if you made long and rushed steps. Do not hurl yourself at your oppo-
nent, but gain and maintain distance in a calm and precise manner.

If the attack by preparation is repeated too often, it will draw a stop-hit rather than a
parry. So when you do use the attack by preparation, initiate it with great economy
and never open the lines more than necessary to trap. Try to shorten your period of
vuloerability.

By remembering that though the preparation and the attack form one smooth flow,
they are actually two separate movements, the fighter will be able to take precautions
against possible counterattacks.

When practicing the preparations, the pupil should execute them on bis partner's
engagement, change of engagement and feints.

SIMPLE ATTACK

Alll direct and indirect attacks composed of a single movement are called “‘simple
attacks" because their object is to go to the target by the most direct route.

A direct simple attack is one made into the line of engagement or into the opposite
line by simply beating the opponent to the punch, or catching him in a moment of
vulnerability.

An indirect simple attack is a single movement, the first half of which causes some re-
action from the opponent so that the second half may be completed opposite the
original line of engagement into the opening line.

Any thrust is more likely to be successful if it is made as the line is opening rather than
as it is being closed. An attack thrown into the opening line gains time because the


--- PAGE 167 ---
ATTACK

‘opponent’s action is committed to moving in the opposite direction, and he must re-
verse his action or alter it substantially in order to defend.

When deceiving the opponent's hand, offensive hand actions are usually made of semni-
circular or circular movements.

Indirect attack often makes use of the disengagement or counter-disengagement in
order to reach the opening line.

‘The disengagement is one single movement of passing the hand from the line of en-
gagement into the opposite line, attacking from a closed line into an open one. To
time this movement for the execution of the attack means that, for a moment, the
defense is moving in an opposite direction to that of the attack. Therefore, it is while
the opponent’s arm is traveling actoss that the fighter must start his offensive action.
Similar timing can be obtained from a fighter who is continually making an absence of
touch and returning to engagement.

Indirect attack

often makes use
Note: Supplement the disengagement with a parry, an inline thrust, head movement, —_of the disengage:
changing of level, trunk movement, etc. ment or counter-

disengagement in
order to reach the
‘opening line.

When going from a high to a low line or vice versa, a supported disengagement is
favored. When going from right to left or vice versa, the attacks are done by cutting
over (moving diagonally across the opponent’s line of engagement).

The following are the two types of simple attack and the movements on the oppo-
nent’s part with which they must be timed. It is also a drill that must be returned to
at regular intervals.

1. Direct attack on
a. the absence of touch
b. the engagement
c. _ the change of engagement
d. the step forward with and without the above

2. Indirect attack with disengagement on
a. the beat
b. the engagement
¢. the change of engagement
d. the first three executed with a step forward

167


--- PAGE 168 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

A
be
Af
fi

It is dangerous
to attack with
just anything that
‘comes to mind.

168

The counter-disengagement is the offensive movement that corresponds to the change
of engagement or to the counter-parry. Its object is to deceive a circular movement,
not a lateral movement which is the object of disengagement. Unlike the disengage.
ment, the counter-disengagement does not end in the line opposite to that of the
opponent.

Example: The attacker engages his opponent in sixte (attacker's high outside line)
‘The defender disenguges in a citcular motion to the opposite line. The attacker follows
circularly, brings the defender’s hand back to the original line and attacks.

Remember, most people are weak in the low line. Often direct your simple attack,
disengagement and counter-disengagement toward the low line. Remember also,
defend while attacking!

If you wish to make use of any form of attack, the opponent's habits and preferences
must be observed, Success in simple altack especially, direct or indirect, lies in correct
selection. The attack must correspond to whatever movement is being or may be made
by the adversary. ‘Thus, it is dangerous to attack with just anything that comes to
mind

ee

‘The success of simple attack also depends on the correct timing of the movement,
which must naturally be related to the eadence of the opponent's movements if it is
not to be caught up in them,

Simple attacks started within distance of the adversary should land, if properly made,
provided the adversary does not supplement the parry by retreating. Thus, to be safe,
induce the opponent to step forward into the “within distance area” and nail him
while he is stepping or merely shifting his weight forward, or when he shows any sign
of “weightiness,” mentally or physically.

Use an “innocently detached rhythm” with the opponent. Once into the attack, con-
centrate on the determination to land with mechanical efficiency and correct timing.

To ensure the success of a simple attack, coordinate all into a powerful one. Maintain
a continuous looseness throughout and develop smooth explosive speed. Relax! Any
tension while awaiting the opportunity to launch the attack (through correctly found
distance) will only give a short, jerky movement, will cause you to move too soon or
will give the opponent an indication of your intention. This fact cannot be stressed
too often. Relaxation wil) bring about smoothness, precision and speed. Don’t forget.


--- PAGE 169 ---
ATTACK

Before initiation — Stay loose but poised.
Initiation — Be economical; use one continuous movement from a state of neutrality,

In flight — Employ the most economical use of movement and force along the most
direct line of attack, backed by tight covering.

After initiation — Use a quick, natural flow to recover the small phasic bent-knee
position.

Emphasize a repetitious drilling of economical form to acquire instinctive initiation,
speed and length of power and penetration. Remember that acceleration can be in-

creased by sheer practice and will power. Mechanical repetition is the basis of this.

Lunge two or three hundred times per day, faster and faster each time.

It is important to recognize that no amount of science can compensate for the lack of
striking power, and powerful hitting is terribly discounted unless it is well-timed, rapid
and accurate.

Thus, the first step for anyone is learning to hit and kick properly with either limb. Nothing bothers

Hitting and kicking must also be taught in conjunction with footwork an adversary more
than variety in

both attack and
defense.

Nothing bothers an adversary more than variety in both attack and defense, and it
eases physical strain by constantly shifting the onus of exertion from one group of
muscles to another.

Likewise, nothing is more dangerous than a half-hearted attack; let your attacks fly,
concerning yourself only with the correct and most determined execution of your
offensive.

While attacking, you should look as boldly aggressive as a beast of prey — without be-
coming reckless — in order to bring pressure at once upon the adversary’s morale.
Possess the eye of an eagle, the cunning of a fox, the agility and alertness of a cat with
the courage, aggressiveness and fierceness of a panther, the striking power of a cobra
and the resistance of a mongoose.

Simple attack will not always be successful against every opponent. Other means will
have to be devised as well. Learn as many varied defensive moves and as many useful
and varied hits as possible; then, you will be able to cope with varied styles as they
come along.

169


--- PAGE 170 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

A
be
4

Compound
attacks may be
of no avail if they
are badly timed
or if a favorable
opportunity is
not seized.

170

COMPOUND ATTACK

Between fighters of equal speed and technique whose judgments of distance are main-
tained correctly, a simple attack is extremely difficult to bring off. The fighter has to
solve the problem of making up his disadvantage in distance and, simultaneously, gain-
ing time. By the use of compound attack, he can do so.

Compound attacks consist of more than one action and may be initiated first by a
feint, a preparation on the hand or an attack on a closer target, followed immediately
by the real attack.

The first movement in a combination should start from the small phasic bent-knee
stance. It should be initiated from an economical flow without telegrapbing — a
smooth, surprising extension.

Basically, compound attacks are a combination of the four forms of simple attack:
thrusts, simple disengagements, counter-disengagements and cut-overs.

‘The complexity of the compound attack used is directly related to the opponent's
ability to parry the offensive movements made. When choosing the strokes to be used
in a compound attack, success will depend on a correct anticipation of the form of
parry (front hand o rear hand, lateral or circular) which the opponent will make in
answer to the feint or first attack. Before using a compound attack, therefore, it is
essential to observe and gain some idea of the opponent's likely reaction.

Feints must be made sufficiently to impress the opponent. Also, employ the least
number of feints necessary to achieve success. The more complicated the form of the
compound attack, the less chance it has of being successful. It is dangerous to attempt
attacks composed of more than two feints.

Simple compound attacks, those comprised of just one feint or prior offensive action
(one-two, low-high, etc.) will have all the more chance of success if they are delivered
on the opponent’s preparation, in particular on the step forward.

Compound attacks may be of no avail if they are badly timed or if a favorable oppor-
tunity is not seized.

Many compound attacks fail because the attacker forgets to regulate the speed of his


--- PAGE 171 ---
feints in such a’ way that they are moving just ahead of the offensive movement. Thus,
it is essential to find both cadence and preferences in the opponent’s defense.

Compound attacks may be:

1. short, fast combinations. Crispy
2, deep, penetrative (and fast) combinations. Uncrispy

All blows strive to exert maximum force for what they are worth; that is why some
need more forceful reinforcement. Thus, the idea of combinations.

Be exposed to the various paths of combinations and be able to change paths during
execution.

During gaps of combinations, insert:

1. _non-commitments to distract the opponent, oF to improve positioning or
the flow.

2. delicacy to score without destroying the overall balance and flow of the
combination (finger jabs, finger fan, finger flicks, backhand, palm thrust),

Use double leads against a man who is slow on his feet or who is exhausted

‘Some boxing combinations (preceded by feints)

right jab/left cross (one-two)
right jab/right uppercut

right jab left cross/right hook
right jab/right uppercut/right hook
right jab/right hook

right jab/body hook

left body thrust/right hook

left body thrust/right body hook

ere ep

ATTACK

It is essential to
find both cadence
and preferences in
the opponent's
defense.

m1


--- PAGE 172 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

#
be
ff
ii

Find kicks
most economical
for yourself and
those most di-
rect to the
opponent.

172

Combinations with Kicking

Find kicks most economical for yourself and those most direct to the opponent. Use
the on-guard position for guidance. Kicks in compound attacks may have several

Purposes.

To disorganize

iy

as

The follow-up would be affected by whether the opponent is caught flatfooted or on

Hook kick to knee, low stomping side kick, lead hand finger jab, rear hand

‘cross or preparation on opponent's hand (trapping)
Direct, fast, groin hook kick to... .

# Don’t take eyes off opponent.

# Don’t commit to point of difficulty in recovery.

# Remember on-guard positioning!

Shin/knee counter stop-kick to...

# at opponent's initiation

# — during development

# at completion (in riposte)

Low hand strike to high lead hook kick (against right stancer)
Low hand strike to high reverse hook kick (with rear leg)
Feint high, hook kick low

Feint hook kick low, strike high

Feint side, spinning back kick

Feint side kick, hook kick (lead foot)

Feint lead straight kick, hook kick (lead foot)

Rear foot sweep feint, lead hook kick

Direct, fast, groin hook kick and
Direct, fast, shin/knee side kick and . . .

the way back.

To force

eeNr

Double stepping shin/knee side kick

Side kick led by a reverse hook with the hand
Hook kick led by a reverse hook with the hand
Pursuing side kicks and hook kicks


--- PAGE 173 ---
ATTACK

When studying combinations of kicks and hands, re-examine the idea of the most eco-
nomical moves for yourself and those moves most direct to the opponent in light of
combination movement.

Shift back and forth from leg to hand, from hand to leg and vary the heights. Go
high/low, low/high or safety triples (low/high/low, high/low/high).

Use natural follow-ups between the lead hand (jab, hook, backfist, shovel path) and
the rear hand (straight, cross, overhand, hammer). Likewise, find the natural follow-
ups between the lead leg (side kick, hook, straight, upward, reverse, vertical, horizontal)
and the rear leg (straight thrusts at various heights, spin kicks, hooks at various

heights). What are the natural follow-ups between hand and leg or leg and hand?

Examine the possibilities in all branches of footwork — advancing, retreating, circling
right, circling left, additional movements like parallel sliding.

Examine the natural follow-ups for blows that miss or fall short and study their Counterattacking

defensive accompaniments. Explore the types of opponent reactions to a miss. isa subtle art,
safer to the man
using it and
more damaging

Nurse the on-guard position. Examine all the physical movements in order to facilitate 1) his opponent,
returning quickly to the on-guard position and being able to attack and defend from
wherever you end up or could end up.

COUNTERATTACK

“sy
Counterattacking is a subtle art, safer to the man using it and more damaging to his

opponent. Attacking by force sometimes does little damage because the opponent is

173


--- PAGE 174 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO
moving in the same direction as the force. His going with the punches removes their

sting
With two evenly-matched competitors, the advantage lies with the man who counters
because when a man leads, he cannot help but expose more than the one who remains

Fi on-guard. Any commitment automatically opens an invitation or target area.

Any commi
ment automatical-

ly opens an invi-
tation ot target
area.

Instead of making a false attack, change of engagement, trapping or beating the hand,
the invitation may be used to provoke the opponent to attack. The provoker may then
parry, block or avoid the opponent’s attack and follow with a counterattack. A

174


--- PAGE 175 ---
double hit is the result of the opponent using the same tactic, making an invitation
with the first hit sind hitting into his adversary as he tries to counter. An invitation
may also be performed by purposely leaving a target area open while in the defensive
position.

To counter, you must avoid being hit and succeed in hitting your opponent while. he is.
still out of position as the result of missing you. You must act instinctively and
instantaneously. ‘This is possible through faithful drilling. Once you lean to counter
instinctively, you can devote your awareness to your broad plan of battle

According to boxing, avoiding your opponent’s lead, the first part of counterfighting,
may be done in three ways

1. Make him miss by slipping it, ducking it or drawing away from it.

2. You can guard or deflect straight punches by turning them away from you,
causing them to miss and expend themselves.

3, You can block the punch with a part of your body which can stand this
punching ~ few blocks are recommended. It is much better for you and
more tiring for the opponent if he misses.

Any active man can be taught to lead and recover with power and rapidity because the
motions are more or less mechanical and he can choose his own time for starting the
“machinery.” It is far different with countering; the “leader” chooses the time and
also that portion of his target about to be exposed. The man who counters is in a
somewhat similar position to one who starts a race at his opponent's “Go!”

Anticipation is the secret of countering and therefore it is preferable to feint your man
into making a lead rather than to wait for him to do so.

A counterattack is an offensive action delivered on the opponent's attack in such a
way that it gains a period of “movement-time”’ from it.

Counters are simple combinations of the most elementary defensive and offensive
moves,

# = — Avoidance of the opponent's lead by defensive means.
# Delivery of corresponding counter hits.

Once you learn to
counter instinet-
ively, you can de-
vote your aware-
ness to your
broad plan of
battle.

175


--- PAGE 176 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

x
ih
“il

‘The counter-
attack calls for
the greatest skill,
the most perfect
planning and the
most delicate
execution of

all fighting
techniques.

176

Samples
LEAD COUNTER
1, jab 1. snap back, counter jab
2. jab 2. slip outside, counter jab
8. lead swing or hook 3. guard with rear forearm and
counter jab
4, jab 4. push aside with rear hand
shovel body hook with lead
5. rear swing or hook 5. beat opponent to punch with
fast jab
6. jab 6. slip inside, rear hand body blow
for counter
1. jab 7. slip inside, left cross
8. lead swing or hook 8. beat opponent to punch with
left cross
9. rear cross 9. duck under, counter to groin
or weave to left body thrust,
10. rear cross or swing 10. guard with lead forearm, return
with left jab

When practicing counters, first, work on good form and later, on speed.

Always follow up and press your advantage after countering until the opponent goes
down or fights back.

‘The counterattack is not a defensive action but a method of using an opponent's
offense as a means to the successful completion of one’s own attack. ‘The counter-
attack is an advanced phase of offense requiring # foreknowledge of specific openings
which will result from attack by the opponent.

‘The counterattack calls for the greatest skill, the most perfect planning and the most
delicate execution of all fighting techniques. It uses as tools all the main techniques:
blocking, guarding, parrying, slipping, bobbing and weaving, ducking, sidestepping,
feinting, drawing and shifting. It uses all phases of grappling, kicking and hitting. Be-
sides a mastery of techniques, the counterattack requires exact timing, unerring judg-
ment and cool, calculating poise. It means careful thought, daring execution and sure
control. It is the greatest art in fighting, the art of the champion,


--- PAGE 177 ---
‘There are numerous counters which may be used for every lead, but for each particular
occasion, there is one counter that is most effective in that situation. Action must be
instantaneous and where there is a wide choice of action, instant action is difficult,

if not impossible, unless the right action has been previously conditioned. Condition-
ing (guided by overall awareness), then, becomes the keystone of the counterattack.

Conditioning is a process whereby a specific stimulus will cause a specific reaction. A
repeated stimulus eventually creates an action pattern in the nervous system. Once
this pattern is established, the mere presence of the stimulus will cause the specific
action. Such action is instantaneous and almost unconscious, which is necessary for
effective countering. Conditioned action should be the result of intense and concen-
trated practice of planned action patterns in response to every lead.

Such action should be practiced slowly for hours, days, weeks, always in response to
certain leads. Finally, the lead itself will automatically bring the right counter.

Fighting should be done with the head, not with the hands or feet. It is true that
during the time of actual fighting, one does not think of how to fight but rather, of
the weakness or strength of the opponent, of possible openings and opportunities,
Fighting will never reach the stage of a true art unless performance of skill is made
automatic and the cortex freed to think and to associate, to make plans and to judge.
‘The higher nerve centers always retain contro! and will act when necessary. It is like
pressing a button to start or stop a machine.

In a consideration of countering, there are three factors that must be understood:

1. _ the lead of the opponent
2. the method of avoiding the lead
8, the counterblow, kick or grappling itself

1. The lead of the opponent is important in that it determines the side of the body
‘open to attack. A right lead exposes the right side of the body, while a lead with the
rear hand exposes almost all of the upper trunk.

2. To avoid leads, it must be decided whether the counterattack should be one or
two-handed. Blocking, guarding, stopping, parrying, all leave one hand with which to
counter, Such maneuvers as slipping, sidestepping, ducking, bobbing and weaving,
feinting, drawing, and shifting allow a two-handed attack,

8. The counter blow depends on the method used in avoiding the opponent's lead as
well as upon the lead itself.

First: have opponent committed and out of form.

ATTACK

Conditioning is a
process whereby a
specific stimulus
will cause a
specific reaction.

77


--- PAGE 178 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

Second: fit in harmoniously to form a single functional unit.
Third: coordinate all power to attack his weakness.

Right Lead Hand Counters for a Straight Right Lead

By blocking or stopping
1, Catch the opponent's lead in your left hand while stepping right, then drive a

straight right lead to his chin.

By parrying

Parry to the outside guard position and hook the right to his solar plexus.
Parry to the outside position and hook the right to his chin.

Parry to the outside position and deliver a right shovel hook to his chin.
Parry to the inside position and drive a straight right lead to his chin.

Parry to the inside position and hook the right to his solar plexus.

Parry to the inside position and deliver a right shovel hook to his solar plexus.

eo Rew

Fit in har-
moniously to By slipping
form a single
functional

Slip to the outside guard position and hook the right to his chin.
unit.

Slip to the outside position and hook the right to his solar plexus.
Slip to the outside position and drive a right uppercut to his solar plexus.
Slip to the outside position and drive a straight right to his chin.

sepr

By sidestepping

Sidestep to the outside guard position and hook the right to his chin.
Sidestep to the outside position and hook the right to his solar plexus.
Sidestep to the outside position and drive a right uppercut to his chin.
Sidestep to the outside position and drive a straight right lead to his chin.

Sepp

Left Rear Hand Counters for a Straight Right Lead

By parrying

1. Parry to the inside guard position with the left hand, then drive the left hand to
the opponent's chin

2. Cross-parry with the right hand to the inside position and drive a straight left
to his side.

178


--- PAGE 179 ---
ATTACK

By slipping

1. Slip to the inside guard position and hook the left to his body.
2. Slip to the inside position and drive a straight left to his body.

3. Slip to the inside position and drive a straight left to his chin.

4. Slip to the inside position and cross a left hook to his chin.

5. Slip to the inside position and drive a straight left to his solar plexus.

By sides

ping

1. _Sidestep to the outside guard position and drive a left cross to his chin,
2, Sidestep to the outside position and drive a left to his body.

3. Sidestep to the inside position and drive a left uppercut to his chin.

4, Sidestep to the inside position and drive a left shovel hook to his chin,

5. Sidestep to the inside position and drive a left uppercut to his solar plexus.

Right Lead Hand Counters for a Straight Left Rear Lead

By parrying

Coordinate all
1. Cross parry with the left hand to the inside guard position and hook the right to power to attack
his chin. his weakness,

2. Cross parry with the left hand to the inside position and hook the right to his
abdomen.

Byslipping

1. Slip to the inside guard position and hook the right to his solar plexus,
2. Slip to the inside position and hook the right to his chin.
3. Slip to the outside position and cross the right to his chin or body.

By sidestepping

1. Sidestep to the inside guard position and drive a straight right to his chin.

Left Rear Hand Counters for a Straight Left Rear Lead

By parrying

1. Parry with the right hand to the inside guard position and drive a straight left to
his chin or body.

179


--- PAGE 180 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

x
he
si
ft

The inside parry
and right hook

to the body is a
jarring, sickening
blow used to slow
‘up an opponent.

130

2, Parry with the right hand to the inside position and hook the left to his chin or
body.

3. Parry with the right hand to the inside position and drive a left uppercut to his
chin or solar plexus.

4. Parry with the right hand to the outside position and hook the left to his chin or
solar plexus.

5. Parry with the right hand to the outside position and drive a left uppercut to his
chin or solar plexus.

By slipping

Slip to the outside guard position and hook the left to his chin or body.
Slip to the outside position and drive a left uppercut to his chin or body.
Slip to the outside position and drive a straight left to his face or body.
Slip to the inside position and drive a left shovel hook to his solar plexus.

seen

By sidestepping

1. Sidestep to the outside guard position and hook the left to his chin or body.
2. Sidestep to the outside and drive a left uppercut to his solar plexus,

‘The inside parry and right jab is a straight right timed so as to take advantage of the
opening left by the opponent’s jab. It is a fundamental counter used consciously or
unconsciously by almost every fighter. It is used to avoid the opponent’s jab and, at
the same time, to sting and jar him. It is used to set up openings for other counters as
well. It is used best against a slow jab.

‘The outside parry and right jab is a jab delivered after slipping the opponent's lead over
the right shoulder. It is a safe way to avoid a right lead while dealing out punishment
at the same time. It is best used against the long-armed opponent as it adds length to
the right arm. ‘The right jab is parried and held momentarily to the right shoulder,
The more the opponent steps in with his jab, the more severely he will be hit. It
should be used in combination with jabbing from the inside position.

‘The inside parry and right book to the body is a jarring, sickening blow used to slow up
an opponent. It is rather dangerous to execute as it brings the body within range of
the opponent's left hand. As the right hand and shoulder drop, the right side of your
body becomes a target for the opponent. Therefore, it must be used suddenly and de-
pends entirely upon speed and deception for its success.


--- PAGE 181 ---
‘The outside parry and right hook is used to bring down the opponent's guard to create
‘openings for the left hand and to slow up an opponent. It is easy, safe and effective.
It often becomes an uppercut rather than a hook.

‘The inside block and left hook is first a block and then, a blow. It should be used
against a slow jab or against the fighter who carries his right lead hand well out from
his shoulder. It is a powerful blow but requires more practice and more accurate
timing than most counters. It requires blocking a right lead from the inside, then
shifting the weight forward and hooking the left to the chin. It is not advisable to use
unless the opening is apparent.

‘The left cross is one of the most talked about blows in Western boxing and is the
counter most often used by all boxers. Delivered properly, it exerts terrific force. It is
merely a left hook to the jaw crossed over an opponent's extended straight right lead,
‘The opponent's jab is slipped over the left shoulder and the left hand is then hooked
from the outside across to the chin. It is easy to execute and is really a finishing blow.

‘The straight inside left is a straight left timed to cross under and inside an opponent's
right lead. It is best used against an opponent who steps well in with his right lead and
particularly in conjunction with the outside perry and right jab or right cross. It is a
set-up or finishing blow, is easy to time and carries terrific power. The right hand must
be carried high, in position to stop or guard.

The inside left to the ribs is a sucker punch in that it takes advantage of a natural open-
ing created by any right lead. It is difficult to guard against. It is a straight left timed
so as to drive underneath an opponent's right arm as he jabs and is used to slow up an
opponent or to “shorten his arm.”

‘To minimize danger of a counter:

1. Feint to disturb your opponent's rhythm, causing him to “‘un-set" as welll as lose
‘a period of movement-time.

2. Change your body position during attack by slipping left and right, changing
levels suddenly (ducking), swaying (bob and weave).

3. Use a constantly changing variety of attacks and defenses.

RIPOSTE

A riposte is an attack (or more accurately a counterattack) following a parry.

ATTACK

A riposte is an
attack (or more
accurately a coun-
terattack) follow-
ing a parry.

181


--- PAGE 182 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

4

‘The immediate
riposte is the
most effective as
it forces the op-

ponent to be on
the defensive.

182

‘The, choice of riposte, like the choice of attack, is determined by the type of defensive
movement one thinks that the opponent is likely to adopt against it. The opponent's
reactions can only be ascertained by observing his usual hand movements when re-
covering from an unsuccessful attack.

Direct riposte is delivered in the same line as that of the parry. It is comprised of only
one direct movement (in-line covering, supplementary defense, trunk movement, ete.).
‘The choice of using direct riposte rests on the reaction and habits of the opponent —
observe, deduce and apply the correct stroke.

Indirect riposte (by disengagement, counter-disengagement, cut-over) is made in the
line opposite to that of the parry by passing the hand under, over or around the oppo-
nent’s hand. It is used against a fighter who covers after being parried. Make it
smooth, economical and covered.

‘Types of Riposte
1. SIMPLE RIPOSTE
a. direct
b. indirect

2, COMPOUND RIPOSTE
a. composed of one or more feints
3. Simple or compound ripostes terminating in the low line

Any of these ripostes can be executed immediately after a parry, or can be delayed.
Also, the riposte can be given with or without the help of a lunge. Whether the lunge
should be used is determined solely by the opponent’s speed of recovery from the
attack.

Generally, the immediate riposte is the most effective as it forces the opponent to be
on the defensive. To ensure its effectiveness, the parry and riposte must be made just
as the attack is ending and before the opponent has an opportunity to change from
offense to defense. This form is known as “parrying and riposting on the final of the
attack,” and implies that the defender is morally certain of the line in which the attack
will end. The immediate riposte on the final of the attack may be done crispy, into 8
direct combination, or it may be non-crispy to adhere and maim.

‘The delayed riposte is where one hesitates in his choice of riposte after the parry,
looking for his opponent's reaction. ‘The opponent, used to a direct riposte, might


--- PAGE 183 ---
ATTACK

automatically go for a parry and, in finding no hand, is apt to become flustered by
this change of cadence and Jose some control in his defense. The delayed riposte may
be a combination attack or one with feinting,

Applications of simple riposte:

1. The direct riposte is executed against a fighter who, when on the lunge,
commits the error of bending his arm preparatory to recovery, thus leaving
himself exposed in the line of the parry.
2. The indirect riposte (by disengagement or cut-over) is used against an oppo-
nent who, expecting a direct riposte, covers in the line in which he has been
parricd. Sometimes he covers intentionally; often it is merely an instinctive
movement, Whatever the reason, if this covering ix successful, the riposter
must anticipate and deccive it by a simple disengagement.
3. The riposte by counterdisengagement is made against an opponent who,
when on the lunge or recovering, does not remain in the line of the parry,
but changes his engagement — in other words, takes a counter, ‘The counter-
disengagement deceives his change of engagement. This form of riposte is .
particularly useful from the right stance when dealing with a left stancer. Knowing the
4, ‘The riposte in low line is the choice made against an opponent who ends his opponent's stroke,

attacks correctly covered and who recovers with his arm extended, thus, it will nol be diffi-

leaving only his lower target open. ceult to time it and
turn it to one’s
advantage,

‘The compound riposte is a counter offensive movement after the parry composed of
one or more feints. Example:

Compound riposte of one-two, following the parry of counter sixte — The
attacker, having been brought back to the line of sixte by the counter and
anticipating the direct riposte, covers in sixte. The riposter, then, main-
taining his bent arm, feints a disengagement, draws the attacker's parry of
quarte and, still with a bent arm, deceives it, finally thrusting the riposte
in sixte,

Again, timing is all-important. A parry and riposte are most effective if made as the

attack is completing its course. At this point, the time available to the opponent to

change from attack to defense is cut to the minimum. Consequently, the riposte has
the best chance to succeed before the attacker can parry it.

By reacting purposely to an opponent's exploratory moves in one definite way, it is
often possible to induce him to use a particular stroke, Knowing the nature of his
stroke, it will not be difficult to time it and turn it Lo one’s advantage,

183


--- PAGE 184 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

Ku
he
ff
ft

Many fighters
commit the error
of leaning back
on their rear leg
when defending
themselves.

184

‘The'counter-riposte is an offensive movement which follows a successful parry of the
riposte. It can be delivered by either the attacker or the defender and can be simple or
compound. It can be executed while on the lunge, while recovering, after having re-
covered or without a lunge, according to the distance.

Counter-riposte may be the result of second intention. By second intention, we mean
that the original attack has been made, not with the object of hitting, but only to draw
parry and riposte from the defender in order to riposte from it in turn. This succes-
sion of offensive and defensive actions executed by the attacker is usually used against
an opponent whose original defense is very strong, and where it is hoped that a second
offensive action will catch him unprepared. The attacker can make either a half re-
covery after the initial false attack or shift the weight of his body back to his rear leg
when parrying. Thus, he places himself out of range of the dangerous riposte. He can
then counter-riposte with a half-lunge or by leaning his body forward.

RENEWED ATTACK

When the opponent retreats without troubling to parry, the redoublement (in boxing)
or remise (in fencing) can be useful. It is a renewed attack or replacement of the
weapon on the target in the same line as that of the original offensive or counter-
offensive action. It is a stroke that may also be aimed at an advanced target such as
the shin or knee and is designed to penalize an opponent who, riposting indirectly or
compoundly, uncovers himself because his movements are too wide.

‘The renewed attack is very effective against fighters who, although having a strong de-
fense, hesitate to riposte or are slow in doing so. Often, this is because they tried to
parry but were off-balance.

And, many fighters commit the error of leaning back on their rear leg when defending
themselves instead of taking a short step back. In such cases, attack the rear weight-
bearing foot.


--- PAGE 185 ---
‘The success of a renewed attack depends, to a very great extent, on the rapidity of the
recovery forward (footwork again!). The opponent must not be allowed to regain any
Joss of balance (physical or psychological) or control which the initial attack may have
cost him.

Generally, the recovery forward is accompanied by an attack on the arms. The ad-
vantages are:
1, filling in the time lag caused by the recovery forward.
2. occupying the opponent’s mind during that period and thus, minimizing the
risk that he might stop-hit or riposte belatedly.
3. finding some degree of support by holding the opponent’s arm during
recovery.

Although a renewed attack on the spur of the moment is possible, to do so does not
make certain that a period of movement-time will be gained. In most cases, its use as a
stroke is premeditated as a result of observing the opponent's habits and tactics.

Following the recovery forward, the renewed attack itself may include the following

Le fen, 7 me ee
Dey PAY Pie

1. straight thrust
2. feint of a straight thrust followed by an indirect simple attack or a

compound attack
3. a preparation on the hand (beat, trap) followed by a simple or compound
attack
p
Re)
\ (

TACTICS

‘Tactics are the brainwork of fighting. They are based on observation and analysis of
the opponent and on intelligent choices of actions against him. ‘The tactical approach

ATTACK

‘Tactics are the
brainwork of
fighting.


--- PAGE 186 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

A
A
Kf
fi

‘The tactical ap-
proach consists of
three parts: pre-
liminary analysis,
preparation and
execution.

186

consists of three parts: preliminary analysis, preparation and execution.
Preliminary analysis: The purpose of the preliminary analysis is to lay the foundation
by scrutinizing the opponent’s habits, virtues and faults. The fighter should know
whether his opponent is aggressive or defensive, whether he likes to make action on
time and what his favorite attacks and parries are. Observe him closely, for even if you
know him, a fighter's physical and mental condition varies from day to day. The
tactical fighter should shorten and lengthen the distance and make use of false attacks
that are persuasive enough to force the opponent to reveal the quality and speed of

his reactions.

_

2
Body. Blows The 100 basic, body blows basic body Wows

AG 2)

pe Hugh Righe =

ination of £0
The Conninal feos oh the opponan



--- PAGE 187 ---
Preparation: It is during the preparation of the action that each fighter looks for cues
and tries to outwit his opponent. ‘The variations are endless, but a few examples may
be pointed out. For instance, the fighter who plans to score on the attack has to take
the initiative and keep control of the play. He attempts to mislead his opponent by
sometimes making a false attack followed by a real attack to a different area or to the
same target area. The lines and positions should be varied in order not to give the
opponent a free moment in which to seize the initiative.

‘The preparation of the attack should be cautious and the fighter must always be ready
to parry if the opponent tries to make a sudden stop-hit or counterattack.

Execution: The execution of the real attack must be done with proper timing, quick-
ly, without break or hesitation. It must be a conscious, accelerated, determined and
decisive movement. Surprise is vital and the fighter must believe in its successful out-
come. If the opponent takes the initiative, the fighter must discourage him by con-
stant threat of counterattack, by short thrusts or strikes, by beating his guard or by
other means which will disturb his concentration,

If physical qualities between fighters are equal, intellectual superiority helps to achieve
vietory. Between equally intelligent fighters, mechanical and technical knowledge can
be decisive.

A fighter must reach a fair standard of technical ability before he can apply tactics
successfully. Once the mechanics can be made automatically, only then can the mind
concentrate on discovering the opponent's reactions, anticipating his intentions and
devising the strategy and tactics required to beat him.

‘Tactics require cool judgment, anticipation, opportunism, bluff and counter-bluff and
the ability to think at least one move ahead. ‘These are combined with courage and the
controlled reaction of muscles and limbs which enable the fighter to carry out simple
or complex movements as required by the situation at any given moment.

It has been said that the fighter's thoughts and actions must be like one flash of light-
ning. Coordination of mind and body is certainly the secret of success in fighting.
Mechanical perfection is useless in fighting without the ability to think and, likewise,
the most intelligent analysis of an opponent's game will not ensure success unless the
requisite fighting stroke can be devised and applied in the proper manner.

ATTACK

A fighter must
reach a fair stan-
dard of technical
ability before he
can apply tactics
successfully.

187


--- PAGE 188 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

‘The basic key

to fighting tactics
is to take advan-

tage of the weak-
ness of the

opponent.

188

The basic key to fighting tactics is to take advantage of the weakness of the opponent.

Would you attack an opponent when he is all prepared, well-balanced and is either ina
nervous, wild rhythm or in a well-controlled, educated rhythm? Would you meet an
angered, rushing opponent head-on? Of course not! A great artist would first control
distance through adjusting footwork and then, proceed to lead the opponent’s rhythm
through feints, false attacks and economical peckings.

It is important to always oppose the opposite tactics to those favored by the opponent
(box a fighter, fight a boxer). It is obviously unwise to continually attack a fighter
who relies on his defense, while one should attack without respite the opponent who
favors using strong and speedy attacks. Counter-time is the answer to the stop-hit
addict and the stop-hit is a counter to the fighter who uses many feints.

A fighter with a long reach or one who continually makes renewed attacks, or attacks
with a step forward, generally requires a wide measure. It is a mistake to always step
back on the attack or preparations, since this will help the opponent to obtain the
space he requires to maneuver. Such an opponent. will probably be disconcerted and
lose his precision if the measure is shortened by a step forward into his attack.

A shorter man tries to make up for his shorter reach by using attacks on the hand as
preparation, or attacks on advanced (closer) targets, or goes into in-fighting, if he is
stronger.

Play with your own cadence to confuse the opponent, then suddenly put on a burst of
speed. The fundamental tactic is to draw the opponent to step forward and attack as
he steps.

A fighter cannot use the same actions against every opponent. A good man should
vary his game with simple and complex attacks and counterattacks with changes of
distance, ete.

Against a calm, quiet fighter, the feints must be longer; against a nervous fighter, the
feints must be shorter. With the calm fighter, one should remain calm; the nervous
type should be agitated (while the fighter himself tries to remain calm). Tall fighters


--- PAGE 189 ---
are usually, slower, but their long reaches are dangerous, s0 it is essential to keep a safe
distance (until the inside position can be taken).

Unconventional fighters use wide, sometimes unexpected motions. Against such
fighters one must keep his distance and the parties should be taken at the very last
moment. Unorthodox fighters usually use simple actions and almost always execute
these in the same tempo. ‘The attacks are made with wide movements, giving a chance
for timed or stop-hits. The loss of a fight against such an opponent frequently points
to the fighter’s inflexibility and his inability to adapt his style to the requirements of
the moment.

Against an opponent who habitually attacks with a preparation on the hand which he
times to perfection, fighting with an absence of touch and varying the measure, in
preference to giving the hand or using an extended on-guard position, will often dis-
concert the opponent and severely limit his game.

Against a patient fighter who remains well-covered on-guard, who keeps out of distance
and evades any attempt to make preparation, it is unsafe to attack directly. Such
fighters generally make accurate stop-kicks or hits, The obvious answer is to draw his
stop-hit with menacing feints and complete a second-intention attack, taking his hand,
maybe to grappling.

Before attacking an opponent who fences with an absence of touch, false attacks or
well-marked feints can be used to draw his reaction. If this is a stop-hit, one can pro-
ceed in counter-time, preferably taking the hand. If he reacts with a parry, one can
complete a compound attack or score by counter-riposte. On the other hand, the ef-
fect may be for him to return to engagement, when an appropriate attack can be made.

‘The novice’s rhythm, probably irregular, is hard to gauge, rendering long phrases
dangerous, as he is unlikely to follow the lead being given him, He will most certainly
panic easily and parry at the slightest provocation. These parries, started too soon and
lacking control, often take the form of whips directed in no particular direction. They
are apt to catch the attacker’s arm, There is, therefore, every reason to be careful not
to attack with compound movements against a novice, but to wait for the opportunity
to launch simple, rapid, economical technique,

Quite unintentionally, the novice will deliver broken-rhythm attacks, which will fool
the more experienced fighter who will not be expecting such a rhythm. Thus, it is es-

ATTACK

A good man
should vary
game with simpl
and complex at-
tacks and counte
attacks with
changes of dis-
tance, etc.

189


--- PAGE 190 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

190

sential to maintain a very carefully judged measure, which will force the novice, finally.
to over-reach to hit.

A golden rule is never to use more complex movements than are necessary to achieve
the desired result. Start with simple movements and only introduce compound ones
when you cannot otherwise succeed. To hit a worthy opponent with a complex move-
ment is satistying and shows one’s mastery of technique; to hit the same opponent by
a simple movement is a sign of greatness.

Half the battle is won when one knows what the adversary is doing. If, in spite of
having correctly chosen the corresponding movements, the action fails, the reason
must be due to faulty techniques.

Repeat! A good fighter knows every stroke.

Knowing that opponents are constantly trying to note one’s habits and weaknesses, it
is obvious that a conscious effort must be made to give variety to one’s game (includ-
ing the use of feigning certain habits and weaknesses).

Right-hander versus left-hander:

‘The right hook is very effective as an offensive punch, and as a counter punch thrown
immediately after a short hop back. Remember, a southpaw who uses his right hand
efficiently along with his normally effective left hand is hard to beat.

‘The right-hander must keep his right hand slightly higher and either beat the left-hand-
er to the punch with a sharp left, or feint with a left-hand punch, hop back, and then
counter with a sharp left, followed by a right hook.

Another version is to keep moving to the right, using the right hand a lot for defense
and the left for attacks to the head and body, more especially to the latter.

Slipping outside a left-stancer's elongated left arm or outside his left lead and counter-
ing with a long left hook to the body is good stuff.

Gliding in to trap in the engagement of the outside line is advisable before a low side
kick attack on an extended target. Lean well away from his lead hand while you side


--- PAGE 191 ---
ATTACK

kick. Econonty-flow starting should eliminate his counter lead kick, especially if the
flow is timed with him shifting his weight forward. Watch that his shifting is not a
preparation to shooting a rear front snap kick. In this case, you should circle to your
right as you glide. You might then follow with another lead backfist or whatever in
another movement period.

‘A beat in the engagement of the outside line can be used as preparation for a false
shin/knee kick, immediately using the one-and-a-half rhythm to finish the lead thrust
to the opponent's face, over his hand. Use a corresponding supplementary guard for
either his disengagement to a left lead hook or to a right cross.

During glides and beats in the engagement of the inside lines of the left-hander before
any attack, watch out for his right leg and cross. You can minimize his rear thrusts by
‘using an economical initiation in the first three inches of your movement. Then,
circle to your right while using the preparation of your attack.

Parry and counter parry him to your high inside line.

Half the battle is

Study slipping the left-hander's left jab while thrusting your right fist to his exposed won when one
knows what the

armpit.

Engage him on the high inside line to disengage and return on his high or low outside
line. This will compel him to use his weak parries — his high outside parry or slower
circular, high inside parry. If the attack is to his outside low line, he will use a low
parry, leaving himself open in the high line. ‘This can become very effective if your
attack to the low line was a feint.

t91

adversary is doing.


--- PAGE 192 ---
‘TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

192

Fighting is a game of timing, tactics and bluff. Two of the most effective means to
this are:

1. The simple attack from immobility. This will often surprise the opponent, es-
pecially after a series of false attacks and feints have been executed. The defender is
subconsciously expecting a preparation or more complex movement and fails to react
in time to the swift and unannounced simple movement.

2. The variation of rhythm or cadence made prior to or during an attack. This may
achieve the same element of surprise. For example, a series of judiciously slowed-
down feints and slow gaining and breaking ground may be used to “put the opponent
tosleep.” A final movement that suddenly erupts at highest speed will often take him
unawares. Again, some rapid feints followed by a deliberately slowed-down or broken-
time final movement will often disconcert a vigilant opponent.

Some fighters form the habit of withdrawing the hand or foot when a hit is directed
towards it. Such fighters are vulnerable to an immediate renewal of the attack by a
quick lunge.

Sometimes, a number of feints in the high line can pave the way for a sudden dis-
engagement to the knee.

Preparation on the knee and trapping the hand or foot while obstructing the oppo
nent’s leg are much used to reduce the movement-time factor. Conversely, attacks on
preparation are particularly effective.

A broken-time attack, making a pause before delivering the final movement, can be
very effective in deceiving the opponent as to the attacker's intention.

‘One way to find the opponent’s reaction is to launch a simple attack just out of dis-
tance so he will still have to parry. Wait for his riposte, deflect it and carefully select
the target area for the counter-parry

Watch your opponent! Never look away from him during the actual fighting. To box
successfully, you must see everything that goes on in the course of your fight. The
place to watch in long-range fighting is your opponent ’s eyes. Notice where animals
look when they fight. When in-fighting, look either at your opponent’s feet or at his
waist.


--- PAGE 193 ---
ATTACK

Take the play away from your opponent and try to get him on the defensive; keep him
guessing what you are going to do next. Don’t give him any rest if you can help it. Hit
from ail angles. When jabbing with your right, make it a double shot. Discover your
opponents weakness. Find out what bothers him the most. Concentrate your attack
on that flaw in his defense and never ease up. Make him fight the type of contest he
fights worst.

Keep moving, thereby preventing him from getting set to punch and making him miss,
Circle and sidestep his rushes. When he gets off balance, be all over him. Follow up
advantages.

Don’t waste motion. Have a purpose in every action of deception, defense or attack.
Don't telegraph any punches.

# Attack with confidence.
# Attack with accuracy.
# Attack with great speed.

Any elementary
In retrospect, all aggressive arm actions, no matter how simple or complex, stem from _ offense or defense
‘one or more of three fundamentals: the beat or preparation on the lead hand or foot pestis Lasgo
f the t, the di t, the simple thrust. oe
of the opponent lisengagement simple thrust es a
be used in the
most advanced
Any elementary offense or defense through proper strategy and ring generalship may, _type of fighting.
under the right conditions, be used in the most advanced type of fighting.

‘Training Aids

During lessons, the master will have made a point of explaining, convincingly, the
tactical application of each stroke, whether of attack, defense or counterattack. In
each case, he will have stressed:

HOW it is done.
WHY it is done.
WHEN ——— _ itisdone.

If the lessons have included the variety of circumstances in which a stroke may have to
be used, then again, the pupil is less likely to be surprised by an unfamiliar action.

Vary your partner and you will not be fixed at a specific tactic or cadence.

193


--- PAGE 194 ---
‘Oncé mare, remember, a successful fighter is one who has learned to select, correctly,
the strokes he has been taught.

‘One of the most important lessons is to master combinations (hands, feet, or both,
‘etc.). Then, you must study the style of your opponent before deciding what combi-
‘nations might beat him.

FIVE WAYS OF ATTACK

Editor's note: ‘The five ways of attack were the last delineations Bruce was using to
‘explain his movements just prior to his death. The incompleteness of

SIMPLE ANGLE ATTACK

SAA ~The simple angle attack is any simple attack thrown at an unexpected angle,
sometimes preceded by feinting. It is often set up by readjusting the dis-
tance with footwork. Study the elusive lead and simple attack.


--- PAGE 195 ---
ATTACK
IMMOBILIZATION ATTACK
IA ~ The immobilization attack is performed by applying an immobilizing prepa-

ration (trapping) on the opponent’s head (hair), hand or leg as you crash the

line to engagement. The trapping keeps the opponent from moving that

part of his body, offering you a safety zone from which to strike. Immobili-

zation attacks can be prepared (set-up) by using any of the other four ways

of attack and traps can be performed in combination or singularly. Study the

stop-hit as well.

jot

Remember, a
successful fighter
is one who has
learned to select,
correctly, the
strokes he has

Immobilization may be used as a preventive measure when attacking with one hand by _been taught.
pinning with the other. It may also be used as a preventive measure when slipping or
countering.

Using immobilization when an opponent actually intends to deliver a blow requires a
knowledge of when the opponent is going to lead and depends on speed and skill for
execution.

Get body feel on the forearm to use it as a dea l¢¥
destructive weapon. Use a loose clawing snap
or club along with elbowing.

PROGRESSIVE INDIRECT ATTACK

PIA — The progressive indirect attack is preceded by a feint or an uncommitted
thrust designed to misdirect the opponent's actions or reactions in order to

195


--- PAGE 196 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

#u
be
A

Except in rare
cases, all move-
ments should be
made as small
as possible,

196

hit the opening line or gain a period of movement-time. The progressive in-
direct attack is performed in a single forward motion without a withdrawal,
as opposed to the single angulated attack preceded by a feint which is actual-
ly two movements. Study feints and disengagements.

‘The principal use of the progressive indirect attack is to overcome an opponent whose
defense is strong and fast enough to deal with a simple direct attack. It is also used to
offer variation in one’s pattern of attack.

Remember, though PIA uses feints and disengagements, each progressive indirect at-
tack is executed in a single, forward motion. It is progressive to gain distance. To
shorten the distance, the measure has to be closed by a good half with your first feint.
Prolong your feint enough to allow your opponent time to react. Leave to your
second movement only the second half of the distance. Do not wait for the block be-
fore completing your attack; keep ahead of it.

It is while the opponent's arm is traveling across, downward, upward, etc., that you
must start your offensive action. That means, for a moment, his defense is moving in
an opposite direction to your attack. Your attack, therefore, is made with a dis-

‘engagement.

Except in rare cases, all movements should be made as small as possible, that is with
the least deviation of the hand necessary to induce the opponent to react. Disengage-
ments, likewise, should pass very close to the opponent's hand.

To make PIA with the leg more effective, try the one-and-a-half beat.

‘The first attack is deep, sudden, economical, well-covered and
above all, well-balanced. Distinguish between one initiation for
power (like the reverse hook) and a straight initiation.
AND-A-HALF: The second half must be a kick that is fast and powerful and

that does not deviate too much from the on-guard position, as
in-fighting may be initiated.

To reach the target, the attacker must deceive the adversary’s forward moving balance,
his rooted balance, his guards and parries and must catch him in a moment of physical
or mental unpreparedness.



--- PAGE 197 ---
ATTACK

During combinations with feinting in the initial progression, loosely change to second

intention. Pay particular attention to the efficient gap-bridging of the two moves to
get speed and power,

ATTACK BY COMBINATION

Combinations
set the opponent.
up for a finishing
knockout blow
or kick,

ABC — The attack by combination is a series of thrusts that follow each other
naturally and are generally thrown to more than one line. Study compound
attack and combination punching.

Attacks by combination are generally composed of set-ups. The term “set-ups” de-
notes a series of blows and/or kicks delivered in a natural sequence. The object is to
maneuver the opponent into such a position or create such an opening that the final
blow of the series will find a vulnerable spot. Combinations set the opponent up for a
finishing knockout blow or kick.

197


--- PAGE 198 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

mere.

‘The difference
between an ex-
pert and a novice
fighter is that the
expert makes use
of each oppor-
tunity.

198

The difference between an expert and a novice fighter is that the expert makes use of
each opportunity and follows up on each opening. He makes use of his sensitive and
dominating aura and his imposing rhythm. He delivers his blows and/or kicks in a well-
planned series, each opening creating another, until finally a clean shot is obtained.

Some blows seem to be “follow blows” in that they come after certain leads. For
instance, the straight left is a follow blow for the right jab, and a right hook is a follow
blow for the straight left.

Tt seems natural to punch straight and then hook and it seems natural to punch first to
the head and then to the body.

5

eyed

Follow blows or set-ups have rhythm and feel as their basis. Punching in rhythm is an
important factor in Western boxing.

Triple-blows are common in ABC. They may be thrown by first slipping to either the
outside or inside and then delivering two body blows, followed by a blow to the head.
The first two blows will bring down the adversary’s guard, opening him up for the
final thrust.

Another version of the triple blow set-up is known as the “safety triple.” The safety
triple is a series of blows which have rhythm as their basis in punching first to the body
and then to the head or vice-versa. The main thing to remember is that the last blow
will be to the spot of the first blow. If the first blow is to the jaw, the last blow will
also be to the jaw.


--- PAGE 199 ---
Study also the one-two variations.

Be exposed to the various paths of combinations and be able to change the path during

execution. i 5
tn
Betifine Lo bi enn fete] Crnbmin ton KA
PAI Ls Chaps Path lenny ome pret ees a
Am

ATTACK BY DRAWING

ABD. — The attack by drawing is an attack or counterattack initiated upon luring the
opponent into a commitment by leaving him an apparent opening or exe-
cuting movements that he may try to time and counter. Attack by drawing
may make use of the previous four ways of attack. Study timing and the
eight basic defense positions,

It’s usually best, whenever possible, to draw your opponent into leading before hitting
out on your own account. By forcing your opponent to commit himself to a decided
step, you can be moderately certain of what he is about to do. His commitment will
deprive him of the ability to change his position and guard swiftly enough to deal
successfully with any offensive you may yourself adopt.

By his mere action of hitting out, you will or should secure an opening of sorts. You
should make him present you with a fair target at which to aim.

Most important of all, you will have borrowed some very considerable force from him
to add to the power of your own counter. Remember, the whole secret of hard hitting
lies in accurate timing, correct placement and mental application.

Keep your awareness and balance to attack after drawing his commitment by exposing
fa target to him, by forcing (closing with or without immobilization, slow or fast) and
by feinting an attack that he will try to counter.

©

ATTACK

Remember,

the whole secret
of bard hitting
lies in accurate
timing, correct
placement and
‘mental appli-
cation,

199


--- PAGE 200 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

A
he
ff
4

To float in
totality, to have
no technique,
is to have

all technique.

CIRCLE WITH NO CIRCUMFERENCE

Jeet Kune Do, ultimately, is not a matter of petty technique but of highly developed
personal spirituality and physique. It is not a question of developing what has already
been developed but of recovering what has been left behind. These things have been
with us, in us, all the time and have never been lost or distorted except by our mis-
guided manipulation of them. Jeet Kune Do is not a matter of technology but of

ual insight and training.

The tools are at an undifferentiated center of a circle that has no circumference, moving
and yet not moving, in tension and yet relaxed, seeing everything happening and yet
not at all anxious about its outcome, with nothing purposely designed, nothing con-
sciously calculated, no anticipation, no expectation — in short, standing innocently like
a baby and yet, with all the cunning, subterfuge and keen intelligence of a fully mature
mind.

Leave sagehood behind and enter once more into ordinary humanity, After coming to
understand the other side, come back and live on this side, After the cultivation of no-
cultivation, one’s thoughts continue to be detached from phenomenal things and one
still remains amid the phenomenal, yet devoid of the phenomenal

Both the man and his surroundings are eliminated. Then, neither the man nor his sur-
roundings are eliminated. Walk on!

‘One can never be the master of his technical knowledge unless all his psychic hindr -
ances are removed and he can keep his mind in a state of emptiness (fluidity), even
purged of whatever technique he has obtained

With all the training thrown to the wind, with a mind perfectly unaware of its own work-
ing, with the self vanishing nowhere, anybody knows where, the art of Jeet Kune Do
attains its perfection.

‘The more aware you become, the more you shed from day to day what you have
Jearned so that your mind is always fresh and uncontaminated by previous conditioning.

Learning techniques corresponds to an intellectual apprehension of the philosophies in
Zen, and in both Zen and Jeet Kune Do, an intellectual proficiency does not cover the
whole ground of the discipline. Both require the attainment of ultimate reality, which
is the emptiness or the absolute. The latter transcends all modes of relativity.



--- PAGE 201 ---
In Jeet Kune Do, all technique is to be forgotten and the unconscious is to be left alone
to handle the situation. The technique will assert its wonders automatically or spon-
taneously. To float in totality, to have no technique, is to have all technique.

‘The knowledge and skill you have achieved are meant to be “forgotten” so you can
float comfortably in emptiness, without obstruction. Learning is important but do not
become its slave. Above all, do not harbor anything external and superfluous — the
mind is primary. Any technique, however worthy and desirable, becomes a disease
when the mind is obsessed with it.

‘The six diseases:

1, The desire for victory.

2. The desire to resort to technical cunning.

3. The desire to display all that has been learned.

4, The desire to awe the enemy.

5. ‘The desire to play the passive role.

6. The desire to get rid of whatever disease one is affected by .

— ‘The spirit is

no doubt the
controlling agent

“To desire” is an attachment. “To desire not to desire” is also an attachment. To be
unattached then, means to be free at once from both statements, positive and negative.
This is to be simultaneously both “yes” and “no,” which is intellectually absurd,
However, not so in Zen

of our existence.

Nirvana is to be consciously unconscious or to be unconsciously conscious. That is its
secret. The act is so direct and immediate that intellectualization finds no room to
insert itself and cut the act to pieces.

The spirit is no doubt the controlling agent of our existence. This invisible seat controls
‘every movement in whatever external situation arises. It is thus, to be extremely mobile,
never “stopping” in any place at any moment, Preserve this state of spiritual freedom
and non-attachment as soon as you assume the fighting stance. Be “master of the
house.”

Ibis the ego that stands rigidly against influences from the outside, and it is this “ego
rigidity” that makes it impossible for us to accept everything that confronts us.


--- PAGE 202 ---
od

TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

K
A
i
fi

Action is our
relationship to
everything.

202

Art lives where absolute freedom is, because where it is not, there can be no
creativity.

Seek not the cultivated innocence of a clever mind that wants to be innocent, but have
rather that state of innocence where there is no denial or acceptance and the mind just
sees what is.

Alll goals apart from the means are illusions. Becoming is a denial of being.

By an error repeated throughout the ages, truth, becoming a law or a faith, places
obstacles in the way of knowledge. Method, which is in its very substance ignorance,
encloses truth within a vicious circle. We should break such a circle, not by seeking
knowledge, but by discovering the cause of ignorance.

Recollection and anticipation are fine qualities of consciousness that distinguish the
human mind from that of the lower animals. But, when actions are directly related to
the problem of life and death, these properties must be relinquished for the sake of
fluidity of thought and lightning rapidity of action.

Action is our relationship to everything. Action is not a matter of right and wrong. It
is only when action is partial that there is a right and a wrong.

Don’t let your attention be arrested! ‘Transcend dualistic comprehension of

Give up thinking as though not giving it up. Observe the techniques as though not
observing. Utilize the art as a means to advance in the study of the Way.

Prajna immovable doesn’t mean immovability or insensibility. It means that the mind is
endowed with capabilities of infinite, instantaneous motion that knows no hindrance.

‘Make the tools see. All movements come out of emptiness and the mind is the name
given to this dynamic aspect of emptiness. It is straight, without ego-centered motiva-
tion. The emptiness is sincerity, genuineness and straightforwardness, allowing nothing
between itself and its movements.

Jeet Kune Do exists in your not seeing me and my not seeing you, where yin and yang
have not yet differentiated themselves.



--- PAGE 203 ---
Jeet Kune Do dislikes partialization or localization. Totality can meet all situations.

When the mind is fluid, the moon is in the stream where it is at once movable and
immovable. The waters are in motion all the time, but the moon retains its serenity.
‘The mind moves in response to ten thousand situations but remains ever the same.

The stillness in stillness is not the real stillness; only when there is stillness in movement
does the universal rhythm manifest itself. To change with change is the changeless state.
Nothingness cannot be confined; the softest thing cannot be snapped.

Assume the pristine purity. In order to display your native activities to the utmost
limit, remove all psychic obstruction.

Would that we could at once strike with the eyes! In the long way from the eye through
the arm to the fist, how much is lost!

In the long way
Sharpen the psychic power of seeing in order to act immediately in accordance with from the eye
what you see. Seeing takes place with the inner mind. through the arm

to the fist, how

much is lost!

Because one’s self-consciousness or ego-consciousness is too conspicuously present over
the entire range of his attention, it interferes with his free display of whatever pro-
ficiency he has so far acquired or is going to acquire. One should remove this obtruding
self or ego-consciousness and apply himself to the work to be done as if nothing par-
ticular were taking place at the moment.

To be of no-mind means to assume the everyday mind.

‘The mind must be wide open to function freely in thought. A limited mind cannot
think freely.

A concentrated mind is not an attentive mind, but a mind that is in the state of aware-
ness can concentrate. Awareness is never exclusive; it includes everything.

Not being tense but ready, not thinking yet not dreaming, not being set but flexible —
it is being wholly and-quietly alive, aware and alert, ready for whatever may come.

203


--- PAGE 204 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

A
A
i
fi

When there is no
center and no cir-
cumference, then

there is truth.

204

‘The Jeet Kune Do man should be on the alert to meet the interchangeability of
‘opposites. As soon as his mind “stops” with either of them, it loses its own fluidity.
AJKD man should keep his mind always in the state of emptiness so that his freedom
in action will never be obstructed.

‘The abiding stage is the point where the mind hesitates to abide. It attaches itself to an
object and stops the flow.

‘The deluded mind is the mind affectively burdened by intellect. ‘Thus, it cannot move
without stopping and reflecting on itself. This obstructs its native fluidity.

‘The wheel revolves when it is not too tightly attached to the axle. When the mind is
tied up, it feels inhibited in every move it makes and nothing is accomplished with
spontaneity. Its work will be of poor quality or it may never be finished at all.

When the mind is tethered to a center, naturally it is not free. It can move only within
the limits of that center. If one is isolated, he is dead; he is paralyzed within the
fortress of his own ideas.

When you are completely aware, there is no space for a conception, a scheme, “the
opponent and I;” there is complete abandonment.

When there is no obstruction, the JKD man’s movements are like flashes of lightning or
like the mirror reflecting images.

When insubstantiality and substantiality are not set and defined, when there is no track
to change what is, one has mastered the formless form. When there is clinging to form,
when there is attachment of the mind, it is not the true path. When technique comes
out of itself, that is the way.

Jeet Kune Do is the art not founded on techniques or doctrine. It is just as you are.

When there is no center and no circumference, then there is truth, When you freely
express, you are the total style.


--- PAGE 205 ---
IT’S JUST A NAME

‘There is a powerful craving in most of us to see ourselves as instruments in the hands of
others and, thus, free ourselves from responsibility for acts which are prompted by our
own questionable inclinations and impulses. Both the strong and the weak grasp at this
alibi. The latter hide their malevolence under the virtue of obedience. The strong, too,
claim absolution by proclaiming themselves the chosen instruments of a higher power —
God, history, fate, nation or humanity.

Similarly, we have more faith in what we imitate than in what we originate. We cannot
derive a sense of absolute certitude from anything which has its roots in us. The most
poignant sense of insecurity comes from standing alone and we are not alone when we
imitate. It is thus with most of us; we are what other people say we are. We know our-
selves chiefly by hearsay.

To become different from what we are, we must have some awareness of what we are,
Whether this being different results in dissimulation or a real change of heart, it cannot
be realized without self-awareness. Yet, it is remarkable that the very people who are
most self-dissatisfied, who crave most for a new identity, have the least self-awareness.
They have turned away from an unwanted self and, hence, never had a good look at it.
The result is that most dissatisfied people can neither dissimulate nor attain a real
change of heart. They are transparent and their unwanted qualities persist through all
attempts at self-<dramatization and self-transformation. It is the lack of self-awareness
which renders us transparent. The soul that knows itself is opaque.

Fear comes from uncertainty. When we are absolutely certain, whether of our worth or
our worthlessness, we are almost impervious to fear. Thus, a feeling of utter unworthi-
ness can be a source of courage. Everything seems possible when we are absolutely
helpless or absolutely powerful — and both states stimulate our gullibility.

Pride is a sense of worth derived from something that is not organically part of us, while
self-esteem is derived from the potentialities and achievements of self. We are proud
when we identify ourselves with an imaginary self, a leader, a holy cause, a collective
body or possessions. ‘There is fear and intolerance in pride; it is sensitive and uncom-
promising. The less promise and potentiality in the self, the more imperative is the need
for pride. The core of pride is self-rejection. It is true, however, that when pride re-
leases energies and serves as a spur to achievement, it can lead to a reconciliation with
the self and the attainment of genuine self-esteem.

Secretiveness can be a source of pride. It is a paradox that secretiveness plays the same
role as boasting ~ both are engaged in the creation of a disguise. Boasting tries to create

‘The soul that
Imows itself is
opaque.

205


--- PAGE 206 ---
bh TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

A
be
‘i
i)

‘Action is a high
road to self-confi-
dence and esteem.

206

an imaginary self, while secretiveness gives us the exhilarating feeling of being princes
disguised in meekness. Of the two, secretiveness is the more difficult and effective. For
the self-observant, boasting breeds self-contempt. Yet, it is as Spinoza said: “Men
govern nothing with more difficulty than their tongues, and they can moderate their
desires more than their words.” Humility, however, is not verbal renunciation of pride
but the substitution of pride for self-awareness and objectivity. Forced humility is
false pride.

A fateful process is set in motion when the individual is released “to the freedom of his
own impotence” and left to justify his existence by his own efforts. The individual on
his own, striving to realize himself and prove his worth, has created all that is great in
literature, art, music, science and technology. ‘This autonomous individual, also, when
he can neither realize himself nor justify his existence by his own efforts, is a breeding
ground of frustration and the seed of the convulsion that shakes our world to its
foundations.

‘The autonomous individual is stable only so long as he is possessed of self-esteem. ‘The
maintenance of self-esteem is a continuous task which taxes all of the individual’s power
and inner resources. We have to prove our worth and justify our existence anew each
day. When, for whatever reason, self-esteem is unattainable, the autonomous individual
becomes a highly explosive entity. He turns away from an unpromising self and plunges
into the pursuit of pride, the explosive substitute for self-esteem. All social disturbances
and upheavals have their roots in crises of individual self-esteem, and the great endeavor
in which the masses most readily unite is basically a search for pride.

So, we acquire a sense of worth either by realizing our talents, or by keeping busy or by
identitying ourselves with something apart from us — be it a cause, a leader, a group,
possessions or whatnot. The path of self-realization is the most difficult. It is taken
only when other avenues to a sense of worth are more or less blocked. Men of talent
have to be encouraged and goaded to engage in creative work. Their groans and laments
echo through the ages.

Action is a high road to self-confidence and esteem. Where it is open, all energies flow
toward it. It comes readily to most people and its rewards are tangible. The cultivation
of the spirit is elusive and difficult and the tendency toward it is rarely spontaneous,
whereas, the opportunities for action are many.

‘The propensity to action is symptomatic of an inner unbalance. To be balanced is to be
more or less at rest. Action is at the bottom — a swinging and flailing of the arms to
regain one’s balance and keep afloat. And if it is true, as Napolean wrote to Carnot,


--- PAGE 207 ---
“The art of government is not to let men grow stale,” then, it is an art of unbalancing.
‘The crucial difference between a totalitarian regime and a free social order is, perhaps,
in the methods of unbalancing by which their people are kept active and striving.

We are told that talent creates its own opportunities. Yet, it sometimes seems that
intense desire creates not only its own opportunities, but its own talents as well.

‘The times of drastic change are times of passions. We can never be fit and ready for
that which is wholly new. We have to adjust ourselves and every radical adjustment is
a crisis in self-esteem: we undergo a test; we have to prove ourselves. A population
subjected to drastic change is, thus, a population of misfits, and misfits live and
breathe in an atmosphere of passion.

‘That we pursue something passionately does not always mean that we really want it or
have a special aptitude for it. Often, the thing we pursue most passionately is but a
substitute for the one thing we really want and cannot have. It is usually safe to predict
that the fulfillment of an excessively cherished desire is not likely to still our nagging
anxiety. In every passionate pursuit, the pursuit counts more than the object pursued.

Our sense of power is more vivid when we break a man’s spirit than when we win his
heart, for we can win a man’s heart one day and lose it the next, But when we break a
proud spirit, we achieve something that is final and absolute.

It is compassion rather than the principle of justice which can guard us against being
unjust to our fellow men.

It is doubtful whether there is such a thing as impulsive or natural tolerance. Tolerance
requires an effort of thought and self-control. Acts of kindness, too, are rarely without
deliberation and “thoughtfulness.” ‘Thus, it seems that some artificiality, some posing
and pretense, is inseparable from any act or attitude which involves a limitation of our
appetites and selfishness. We ought to beware of people who do not think it necessary
to pretend that they are good and decent. Lack of hypocrisy in such things hints at a
capacity for a more depraved ruthlessness. Pretense is often an indispensable step in the
attainment of genuineness. It is a form into which genuine inclinations flow and
solidify.

‘The control of our being is not unlike the combination of a safe. One turn of the knob
rarely unlocks the safe; each advance and retreat is a step toward one’s final
achievement.

z= 2
ate pursuit, the
pursuit counts
more than the
object pursued.

207


--- PAGE 208 ---
TAO OF JEET KUNE DO

208

Jeet Kune Do is not to hurt, but is one of the avenues through which life opens its
Secrets to us. We can see through others only when we can see through ourselves and
Jeet Kune Do is a step toward knowing oneself.

Self-knowledge is the basis of Jeet Kune Do because it is effective, not only for the
individual's martial art, but also for his life as a human being.

Learning Jeet Kune Do is not a matter seeking knowledge or accumulating stylized
pattern, but is discovering the cause of ignorance.

If people say Jeet Kune Do is different from “this
of Jeet Kune Do be wiped out, for that is what it
over it.

or from “that,” then let the name
just a name. Please don’t fuss

©

Ff )

[Pd like to express my sincere appreciation 10 Gil
lof material, 0 Geri Simon for ber graphic design; to Dan Inosanto, Bruce's asistant and close friend, and otber JKD
udents who are dedicated to preseroing and expanding Bruce's ideas; and to Obara Publications, especially M.
Uyehare and Dick Hennesty, who out of long friendsbip and respect for Bruce, bave faithfully reproduced bis
‘original notes and drawings.

Linda Lee


--- PAGE 209 ---
\
\
A

OHARA PUBLICATIONS, INCORPORATED: BURBANK. CALIFORNIA

ep ee eee


--- PAGE 210 ---
_ ESSAY ON JEET KUNE DO
: gs

BRUCE LEE


--- PAGE 211 ---
THREE SWORDSMEN SAT DOWN AT A TABLE IN A CROWDED JAPANESE INN
AND BEGAN TO MAKE LOUD COMMENTS ABOUT THEIR NEIGHBOR, HOPING TO
GOAD HIM INTO A DUEL. THE MASTER SEEMED TO TAKE NO NOTICE OF THEM,
BUT WHEN THEIR REMARKS BECAME RUDER AND MORE POINTED, HE RAISED
HIS CHOPSTICKS AND, IN QUICK SNIPS, EFFORTLESSLY CAUGHT FOUR FLIES
WINGS. AS HE SLOWLY LAID DOWN THE CHOPSTICKS, THE THREE
SWORDSMEN HURRIEDLY LEFT THE ROOM.

THE STORY ILLUSTRATES A GREAT DIFFERENCE BETWEEN ORIENTAL AND
WESTERN THINKING. THE AVERAGE WESTERNER WOULD BE INTRIGUED BY
SOMEONE'S ABILITY TO CATCH FLIES WITH CHOPSTICKS, AND WOULD
PROBABLY SAY THAT HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH HOW GOOD HE IS IN
COMBAT. BUT THE ORIENTAL WOULD REALIZE THAT A MAN WHO HAS
ATTAINED SUCH COMPLETE MASTERY OF AN ART REVEALS HIS PRESENCE OF
MIND IN EVERY ACTION. THE STATE OF WHOLENESS AND IMPERTURBABILITY
DEMONSTRATED BY THE MASTER INDICATED HIS MASTERY OF SELF.

AND SO IT IS WITH MARTIAL ARTS. TO THE WESTERNER THE FINGER JABS,
THE SIDE KICKS, AND THE BACK FIST, ETC, ARE TOOLS OF DESTRUCTION
AND VIOLENCE WHICH IS, INDEED, ONE OF THEIR FUNCTIONS. BUT THE
ORIENTAL BELIEVES THAT THE PRIMARY FUNCTION OF SUCH TOOLS IS
REVEALED WHEN THEY ARE SELF-DISTRACTED AND DESTROY GREED, FEAR,
ANGER AND FOLLY.

MANIPULATIVE SKILL IS NOT ORIENTAL’S GOAL. HE IS AIMING HIS KICKS AND
BLOWS AT HIMSELF AND WHEN SUCCESSFUL, MAY EVEN SUCCEED IN
KNOCKING HIMSELF OUT. AFTER YEARS OF TRAINING, HE HOPES TO ACHIEVE
THAT VITAL LOOSENING AND EQUABILITY OF ALL POWERS WHICH IS WHAT
THE THREE SWORDSMEN SAW IN THE MASTER.

IN EVERY DAY LIFE THE MIND IS CAPABLE OF MOVING FROM ONE THOUGHT
OR OBJECT TO ANOTHER — “BEING” MIND INSTEAD OF “HAVING” MIND.
HOWEVER, WHEN FACE TO FACE WITH AN OPPONENT IN A DEADLY
CONTEST, THE MIND TENDS TO STICK AND LOSES IT MOBILITY. STICK ABILITY
OR STOPPAGE IS A PROBLEM THAT HAUNTS EVERY MARTIAL ARTIST.

KWAN — IN (AVALOKITESVARA), THE GODDESS OF MERCY, IS SOMETIMES.
REPRESENTED WITH ONE THOUSAND ARMS, EACH HOLDING A DIFFERENT
INSTRUMENT. IF HER MIND STOPS (999) WILL BE OF NO USE WHATEVER, IT IS
ONLY BECAUSE OF HER MIND NOT STOPPING WITH THE USE OF ONE ARM,
BUT MOVING FROM ONE INSTRUMENT TO ANOTHER, THAT ALL HER ARMS
PROVE USEFUL WITH THE UTMOST DEGREE OF EFFICIENCY. THUS THE
FIGURE IS MEANT TO DEMONSTRATE THAT, WHEN THE ULTIMATE TRUTH IS.
REALIZED EVEN AS MANY AS ONE THOUSAND ARMS ON ONE BODY MAY EACH
BE SERVICE ABLE IN ONE WAY OR ANOTHER.

“PURPOSELESSNESS”, “EMPTY — MINDEDNESS” OR “NO ART” ARE
FREQUENT TERMS USED IN THE ORIENT TO DENOTE THE ULTIMATE


--- PAGE 212 ---
ACHIEVEMENT OF A MARTIAL ARTIST. ACCORDING TO ZEN, THE SPIRIT IS BY
NATURE FORMLESS AND NO “ OBJECTS” ARE TO BE HARBORED IN IT. WHEN
ANYTHING IS HARBORED THERE, PSYCHIC ENERGY IS DRAWN TOWARD IT,
AND WHEN PSYCHIC ENERGY LOSES ITS BALANCE, ITS NATIVE ACTIVITY
BECOMES CRAMPED AND IT NO LONGER FLOWS WITH THE STREAM, WHERE
THE ENERGY IS TIPPED, THERE IS TOO MUCH OF IT IN ONE DIRECTION AND A.
SHORTAGE OF IT IN ANOTHER DIRECTION. WHERE THERE IS TOO MUCH
ENERGY, IT OVERFLOWS AND CANNOT BE CONTROLLED. IN EITHER CASE, IT
IS UNABLE TO COPE WITH EVER — CHANGING SITUATIONS. BUT WHEN THERE
PREVAILS A STATE OF “PURPOSELESSNESS” (WHICH IS ALSO A STAGE OF
FLUIDITY OR MINDLESSNESS) , THE SPIRIT HARBORS NOTHING IN IT, NOR IS IT
TIPPED IN ONE DIRECTION; IT TRANSCENDS BOTH SUBJECT AND OBJECT; IT
RESPONDS EMPTY — MINDEDLY TO WHATEVER IS HAPPENING.

TRUE MASTERY TRANSCENDS ANY PARTICULAR ART. IT STEMS FROM
MASTERY OF ONESELF — THE ABILITY, DEVELOPED THROUGH SELF —
DISCIPLINE, TO BE CALM, FULLY AWARE, AND COMPLETELY IN TUNE WITH
ONESELF AND THE SURROUNDINGS. THEN, AND ONLY THEN, CAN A PERSON
KNOW HIMSELF.

— BRUCE LEE
